According to a family member of the pilot, the airplane had sat on the airport's ramp for about 
a year without having been flown. About a week before the accident, the pilot flew the airplane 
once around the traffic pattern. On the day of the accident, the pilot had removed and 
sandblasted the spark plugs, checked the cylinders for compression, and removed and cleaned 
the air filter; the filter was reported to have had "some goop" on it. A witness reported 
observing the airplane take off, and, as it went by him at 100 to 200 feet above ground level, he 
heard a "popping noise." He subsequently observed the airplane make a quick left turn to a left 
downwind leg, and as the airplane continued on the downwind he observed the nose increase 
in pitch, but it was not climbing. As the airplane came abeam the numbers, it made a steep left 
turn, followed by the nose dropping before it dove into the ground and erupted in flames. The 
airplane was consumed by a post impact fire. A post accident examination of the engine 
revealed no anomalies with the cylinders and valve train. All spark plugs were found to have 
excessive gaps, and all but one failed a bench check when exposed to pressure greater than 80 
psi. A post accident examination of the airframe revealed no anomalies. No aircraft or engine 
logbooks were located during the investigation.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed that led to a stall/spin while maneuvering in 
the traffic pattern.
On August 1, 2009, about 1350 mountain daylight time, an experimental built Gray RV-6, 
N69KG, was destroyed following impact with terrain near the Caldwell Industrial Airport 
(EUL), Caldwell, Idaho. The private pilot, the sole occupant, was killed. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local flight, which was conducted in accordance with 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
According to a witness who was positioned about midfield on the airport, he observed a tan 
colored with blue trim RV-6 type aircraft depart Runway 12. The witness stated that as the 
airplane passed him at an altitude of about 100 to 200 feet [above ground level] (agl), "–the 
engine of the plane began to make a 'popping' noise." The witness reported that a few seconds 
later the aircraft turned onto a left crosswind, then "quickly" to downwind at an altitude of 
about 200 feet [agl]. The witness further reported that as the airplane continued on downwind 
"–the nose of the RV was increasing its pitch and it was apparent that the RV was not 
climbing. As the RV came approximately abeam the number 12 on its left downwind, it made a 
steep left turn as to land on 12. As this occurred the nose of the RV dropped, and within a few 
seconds I saw it dive into the ground and erupt into flames." Prior to impact the airplane had 
collided with a set of power lines, which bordered the airport on its north perimeter. The 
airplane was consumed by the post impact fire.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector who examined the accident 
site reported that the airplane came to rest in an upright position next to an airport perimeter 
fence and inside airport property. The accident site was located about 700 feet northeast of the 
approach end of Runway 12. The fuselage, empennage, and engine were all located together at 
the main impact site. Due to impact forces and thermal damage, control continuity could not 
be confirmed. There were no observed anomalies with the airframe when examined at the 
accident site.   
The airplane's engine was examined under the supervision of the FAA inspector by a 
certificated airframe and powerplant mechanic. The examination revealed no anomalies with 
the cylinders or the valve train as a result of a borescope inspection. Additionally, no stuck 
valves were observed. The examination also revealed that all spark plugs were found to have 
excessive gaps from .028 - .030; the manufacturer recommends .016 - .021. All but one spark 
plug failed a bench check when exposed to pressures above 80 psi. During the examination, the 
oil filter was cut and inspected with an acceptable amount of trace particulate matter noted.
According to the FAA inspector, a family member reported that the airplane had set idle for 
about a year on the airport ramp and had not been flown. The family member stated that about 
a week prior to the accident flight [the pilot] flew it [the airplane] around the airport traffic 
pattern. The family member further revealed that on the morning of the accident flight [the 
pilot] removed the spark plugs, sandblasted them, checked [cylinder] compression, and 
removed the air filter. The family member reported, "The filter had 'goop' on it. [The pilot] 
cleaned it around noon before the accident." No aircraft, engine or pilot logbooks were located 
during the investigation.
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Ada County Coroner's Office, Boise, Idaho, on 
August 3, 2009. According to the autopsy report the cause of death was "–Carbon monoxide 
poisoning and thermal injuries." The FAA's Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma, performed postmortem toxicology of specimens from the pilot. The specimens 
were negative for cyanide, ethanol, and drugs. The results also revealed 28 percent carbon 
monoxide was detected in the blood.
