The pilot reported that during the takeoff roll, the engine began to lose power. With insufficient 
runway remaining to stop, he elected to continue the takeoff. The engine continued to lose 
power and the airplane settled into the trees, resulting in structural damage to the wings. 
Postaccident inspection of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
revealed no evidence of preexisting mechanical anomalies. The engine ran satisfactorily after 
the accident; however a full-power run was not conducted due to propeller damage. The pilot 
reported that the grass in the run-up area was wet, with standing water, and that conditions 
were ﬁideal for the formation of carburetor ice.ﬂ While the Federal Aviation Administration's 
Carburetor Icing Chart revealed ﬁSerious icing (glide power)ﬂ for the reported temperature and 
dew point conditions, the investigation could not conclusively determine that carburetor ice 
caused the loss of engine power.
A loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On August 1, 2009, about 0845 eastern daylight time, a Boeing A75N1, N49778, was 
substantially damaged following a loss of engine power and forced landing at Bowman Field 
Airport, Livermore Falls, Maine. The airplane was operated by a private individual. The 
certificated private pilot and one passenger were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time, and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
personal flight. The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that he took off in the airplane after replacing the fuel filter, which was brand 
new. It was very warm and humid at the time, and you could see a fog layer about 4 feet off the 
ground. The grass runway was wet, and there was standing water in the run-up area. He stated 
that the conditions at the time were ﬁideal for the formation of carburetor ice.ﬂ The engine 
began to lose power late in the takeoff roll, but there was insufficient room to stop. He took off, 
the engine continued to lose power, and the airplane settled into the trees. Three of the four 
wings sustained substantial damage.
Following the accident, two inspectors with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) visited 
the accident site and inspected the wreckage. They reported that a physical examination of the 
airplane and fuel system revealed no anomalies. The fuel strainer bowl was clean and there was 
no evidence of fuel contamination found. They reported that a complete fuel system cleaning 
occurred approximately 1.5 hours prior to the accident.
After the wreckage was recovered to the pilot™s storage facility, a test run of the engine was 
attempted by the pilot. He reported that the engine started on the first attempt and ran without 
hesitation or loss of power. The pilot did not attempt a full-power run due to the impact 
damage to the propeller.
According to FAA records, the pilot™s latest third class medical certificate was dated October 19, 
2005. The pilot reported that he had accomplished a biennial flight review (BFR) about one 
year prior to the accident. He also reported that the airplane received an annual inspection in 
August, 2008. He was unable to provide documentation of a current BFR or annual aircraft 
inspection to the FAA inspectors.  
The 0853 weather observation for Augusta, Maine (AUG), located about 16 miles east of the 
accident site, included the following: sky clear, winds calm, visibility 10 statute miles, 
temperature 21 degrees Celsius, dew point 17 degrees Celsius, and altimeter setting of 30.02 
inches of mercury. The Federal Aviation Administration Special Airworthiness Bulletin number 
CE-09-35, titled ﬁCarburetor Icing Prevention,ﬂ includes a chart indicating conditions 
conducive to carburetor icing. For the approximate ambient temperature and dew point at the 
time of the accident, the flight was conducted in ﬁSerious icing (glide power)ﬂ conditions.
