Witnesses reported that the engine sounded smooth and continuous at ﬁfullﬂ power throughout 
the takeoff. After the airplane climbed to about 20 ft above the runway, the left canopy 
suddenly ﬁpopped openﬂ and began ﬁflapping up and down.ﬂ The pilot reported that, in 
response, she reduced the engine power. The airplane then began ﬁporpoisingﬂ before it 
entered a steep left bank and subsequently impacted grass on the left side of the runway in a 
left-wing-low attitude. The pilot egressed and then crawled away from the airplane and awaited 
assistance. The airplane was consumed by a postcrash fire. 
The left canopy was found separated from the airplane outside the fire area. The handle was 
found in the ﬁopenﬂ position. The pilot reported no mechanical deficiencies with the airplane 
that would have precluded normal operation. She stated that, although she had used a checklist 
during her preflight and pretakeoff activities, which included a checklist item to ensure the 
security of the canopy, she ﬁcould never knowﬂ if she had failed to secure the canopy latch or if 
the latch had somehow malfunctioned. Fire damage to the canopy frame and latch point in the 
fuselage precluded a determination of what caused the left canopy to open in flight.
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control after the left cockpit canopy opened during 
takeoff for reasons that could not be determined due to fire damage.
On April 4, 2014, about 1620 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Helpling 
Tango 2, N599WT, was destroyed during collision with terrain and a subsequent post-crash 
fire after takeoff from Ocala International Airport (OCF), Ocala, Florida. The private 
pilot/owner/builder was seriously injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which was conducted under the provisions of Title 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
Several witnesses provided statements to the police, and their statements were consistent 
throughout. Some said that their attention was drawn to the sound of the airplane's engine 
during its pre-takeoff run-up due to a "popping" sound; but reported that the engine sound was 
smooth and continuous at "full" power throughout the takeoff.
After takeoff, the airplane climbed about 20 feet above the runway when the left canopy 
opened "suddenly" and began "flapping up and down." The airplane began "porpoising" before 
it entered a steep left bank and subsequently impacted the ground in a left-wing-low attitude 
and a postcrash fire ensued. 
The pilot's fiancé did not witness the accident, but responded immediately to the accident site 
where the pilot was found some distance from the airplane. He reported to both police and an 
NTSB investigator that the pilot stated the canopy opened unexpectedly.
Approximately three weeks after the accident, and while still recovering from her injuries, the 
pilot prepared a statement with the assistance of a friend. She reported that the canopy 
"popped open" at low altitude and she responded by reducing engine power. The airplane then 
impacted the grass on the left side of the runway and caught fire. The pilot egressed the 
airplane, crawled some distance away, and awaited assistance. She reported there were no 
mechanical deficiencies with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation. 
Examination of photographs taken by the Ocala Police Department (OPD) revealed that the 
airplane came to rest upright. The engine compartment, instrument panel, cockpit, cabin area, 
and both wings were consumed by fire. The empennage appeared largely intact.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land. Her most 
recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class medical certificate was issued on 
September 27, 2012. The pilot reported 675 total hours of flight experience, of which 22 hours 
were in the accident airplane make and model.
According to FAA records, the airplane's airworthiness certificate was issued February 15, 
2013. The airplane had accrued 12.5 total aircraft hours at the time of the accident. 
According to the chief test pilot for the airplane kit manufacturer, incidents of the left canopy 
opening in flight had been reported to the company on three occasions, and all were on takeoff. 
None of the three events resulted in an accident. On one occasion, the canopy completely 
separated from the airplane. The pilot continued the takeoff, completed a traffic pattern, and 
subsequently landed without incident. The airplane was described as "easily controllable 
throughout the flight and landing." In the other two events, the takeoffs were aborted. 
According to the reports, in two of the events, the canopy was left unlatched prior to takeoff, 
and on the other occasion, the canopy was latched "improperly."
In a telephone interview, the manufacturer's vice president was asked if the company 
published a checklist for the Tango 2 airplane. He explained that the company offered a 
template, or outline checklist, but that it was impossible to produce a checklist appropriate to 
all individual airplanes, due to the variations in equipment selected by each owner/builder. 
FAA Advisory Circular 90-89A, Amateur-Built Aircraft and Ultralight Flight Testing 
Handbook, Section 9: Paperwork; stated, 
"Checklists: In addition to the assembly/airworthiness checklist previously discussed in section 
7, the builder should prepare the following checklists: preflight; take-off/cruise; before 
starting; descent/before landing; starting the engine; after landing; before takeoff; securing the 
aircraft; and emergency procedures. A checklist to cover the above procedures may seem a 
tedious task, but it will only be the size of a 5x8 card -- similar to a checklist for a Cessna 150 or 
a Piper PA-28-140. NOTE: The amateur-builder should anticipate several revisions to the 
checklists."
In a telephone interview, the pilot/owner/builder explained that she did develop a checklist for 
the airplane, had it with her, and consulted it prior to the accident flight. She stated that one 
item on the checklist was to ensure the security of the canopy, but stated she "could never 
know" if she had neglected to secure the canopy, or if the latch had somehow malfunctioned.
During the accident the left canopy separated from the airplane and was found outside the fire 
area. The handle was found in the open position. The canopy frame and latch point in the 
fuselage were fire damaged.
