The RV-12 was inbound for landing and had joined a 45-degree approach to the left base leg for 
the runway. The Chipmunk had taxied to the end of the runway to conduct an engine run-up. 
The pilot of the RV-12 said that he made a radio call on the common traffic advisory frequency 
(CTAF) while he was on the 45-degree base leg and during his turn to final. The Chipmunk 
pilot stated that he made a radio call on the CTAF stating his intention to depart. Both pilots 
said that they did not hear any traffic on the CTAF, nor did they see any traffic in the pattern or 
on the ground. The pilot of the RV-12 stated that the front half of the Chipmunk came into his 
view as the RV-12 was in its landing flare. Subsequently, the propeller of the RV-12 struck the 
rudder and vertical stabilizer of the Chipmunk, causing substantial damage and causing the 
RV-12 to lose thrust. A portion of the propeller blade tip from the RV-12 and a lead rudder 
balance weight from the Chipmunk were later discovered on the west half of the runway. The 
Chipmunk continued with the takeoff and landed shortly thereafter at a nearby airport. The 
RV-12 landed safely immediately after the collision. 
Examination of the airport environment revealed that, depending on the angle and altitude of 
inbound aircraft and the position of aircraft on the ground, trees surrounding the approach end 
of the runway could block a pilot™s view of arriving or departing aircraft.
The failure of both pilots to see and avoid each other, which resulted in a collision. 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 3, 2014 about 1230 eastern daylight time (EDT), an experimental amateur-built Vans 
RV-12, N409FM, and a DeHavilland DHC-1"Chipmunk,"N12BH collided over the runway at 
the Bayport Aerodrome (23N), Bayport, New York. The Chipmunk received substantial damage 
and the RV-12 received minor damage. The private pilot in the RV-12 and the airline transport 
pilot in the Chipmunk were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plans were filed for either flight. The RV-12 departed the Cherry Ridge Airport (N30) in 
Honesdale, Pennsylvania. The Chipmunk was departing Bayport Aerodrome for Long Island 
MacArthur Airport (ISP) in Islip, New York. Both airplanes were being operated as personal 
flights in accordance with Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot of the RV-12, he stated that he made a radio call at the "mid bay" 
position announcing his intentions to land at 23N. The pilot also stated that he made 
subsequent radio calls while crossing the shoreline, when on 45-degree left base leg for runway 
36, and on the turn onto the final. During the approach, the pilot of the RV-12 stated that he 
did not see any traffic on the runway. When the pilot of the RV-12 began his flare for landing, 
he stated that the "forward half of a departing aircraft came into view." One of the propeller 
blades of the RV-12 then struck the upper aft portion of the vertical stabilizer and rudder of the 
Chipmunk. The RV-12 then landed without power, while the Chipmunk departed to the north 
and continued to ISP. A portion of the propeller blade tip from the RV-12 and a lead rudder 
balance weight from the Chipmunk, were later discovered on the west half of runway.
According to the pilot of the Chipmunk, after taxing to the south end of runway 36 he did an 
engine run-up and transmitted his intentions to depart on runway 36 on the traffic advisory 
frequency. The pilot said that he did not see anyone in the traffic pattern or hear them on the 
radio when he conducted a 360-degree turn to look for traffic prior to departing on the runway. 
At rotation the pilot of the Chipmunk stated that he "thought something in the tail or in the 
back had broken or let go or even possibly was hit by a bird." The pilot of the Chipmunk also 
stated that he thought his airplane was "controllable and flyable" and so he continued to ISP 
for landing on runway 33L.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot of the RV-12 held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) private pilot certificate 
with a rating for airplane single-engine land. He reported on that he had accrued 
approximately 740 total flight hours.
The pilot of the Chipmunk held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airline transport pilot 
certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land, multi-engine land. He also held a flight 
instructor certificate for airplane single-engine land, multi-engine land, and instrument 
airplane. His most recent FAA first-class medical certificate was issued on April 4, 2014. He 
reported on that date that he had accrued approximately 36,000 total flight hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to FAA and airplane maintenance records, the RV-12 was issued its special 
airworthiness certificate in 2010. The airplane's most recent conditional inspection was 
completed on October 1, 2013. At the time of accident, the airplane had accrued approximately 
338 total hours of operation.
According to FAA and airplane maintenance records, the Chipmunk was manufactured in 
1956. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on March 11, 2014. At the 
time of accident, the airplane had accrued approximately 2,500 total hours of operation.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Recorded weather obtained from ISP's automated weather observation system located 
approximately 3 miles northwest of the accident site revealed that visual flight rules weather 
existed around the time of the accident. 
At 1156 the reported weather included: wind 320 degrees at 9 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, 
scattered clouds at 25,000 feet, temperature 14 C, dewpoint -4 C, altimeter 30.09 inches of 
mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
According to the airport facility directory (AFD), 23N, was a publicly owned, non-towered 
airport with an elevation of about 41 feet above mean sea level (MSL). It had one turf runway 
oriented in a 18/36 configuration. Which was 2,740 feet long and 150 feet wide. Runway 36 
threshold was displaced 550 feet and was marked with concrete blocks flush with the turf 
surface. The gradient for runway 36 was 2%. There was a visual approach slope indicator which 
provided a 5 degree glidepath located on the right side of the runway, however, the AFD stated 
that the panels may or may not be lighted. Obstacles existed at the approach end of runway 36 
in the form of 60 foot tall trees which were located 150 feet from the runway on both sides of 
the centerline which took an 11:1 slope to clear.
The AFD for 23N advised that all arriving aircraft enter the traffic pattern on a 45-degree left 
base leg for runway 36 at 600 feet MSL due to heavy jet traffic out of ISP. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
A review of satellite imagery and aerial photos of the airport indicated that portions of the 
approach end of runway 36 would be blocked from view due to trees, when using the published 
traffic pattern entry for runway 36. It was also noted that aircraft entering the traffic pattern 
for runway 36 would not be visible by aircraft on the ground holding short at the approach end 
of runway 36. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
As a result of this accident, in order to improve safety, the New York Department of 
Transportation added the following comments to the Airport/Facility Directory:
"PILOTS BE ADVISED: DUE TO PATTERN PROCEDURES, AIRCRAFT IN THE RUN-UP 
AREA OR STARTING TAKEOFF ROLL ON RWY 36, AND AIRCRAFT ON FINAL APPROACH 
TO RWY 36, MAY NOT BE ABLE TO SEE EACH OTHER DUE TO TREES."
