While on short final approach the pilot reduced engine power to idle and the engine lost power. 
A forced landing was made in a field short of the runway and the airplane incurred substantial 
damage. Examination of the engine by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, and a 
representative of the engine manufacturer revealed that the carburetor mixture and throttle 
stop were found to be out of adjustment. The Rotax maintenance manual requires checking of 
these adjustments during each 100-hour inspection.
A loss of engine power due to the failure of company maintenance personnel to comply with 
engine manufacturers requirements for carburetor adjustment during the 100-hour inspection.
On January 3, 2008, at 1545 eastern standard time, a Costruzioni Aeronautiche Techna P2002 
Sierra, certificated Light Sport airplane, N26WR, lost engine power during final approach and 
collided with the ground during the subsequent forced landing, at the Bay Bridge Airport 
(W29), Stevensville, Maryland. The airplane was substantially damaged. The commercial pilot 
was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight. The 
airplane was registered to and operated by CSP Leasing LLC under the provision of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The flight originated from W29 at 1440. 
The pilot stated that during approach to W29 he reported downwind, base, and then final to 
runway 29. At about 100 feet above ground level he reduced the engine power to idle and 
subsequently lost engine power. He then made an emergency landing in a field short of runway 
29.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, and the engine's 
manufacturer revealed that there were 10 gallons of AVGAS in the wing tanks. During the 
examination of the engine the mechanical settings of the carburetor mixture and throttle stop 
were found to be out of adjustment. According to the Rotax maintenance manual the 
carburetor adjustments and synchronization should be checked at the 100-hour inspection. 
Review of the engine maintenance logbook revealed that the 100-hour inspection was 
conducted on December 17, 2007 at a Hobbs and total time of 113.4 hours, 19 flight hours 
before the accident. There were no recorded entries of the carburetor inspection or adjustment.
