The pilots were attending a fly-in at the airport.  One pilot in a low-wing airplane was landing, 
and the other pilot in a high-wing airplane was departing.  The runup area for the landing 
runway is situated at the beginning of the runway so that following a runup, a pilot can depart 
straight from the runup area onto the runway.  A witness said that the landing pilot had made 
radio transmissions around the traffic pattern, and then indicated that he was on final 
approach for landing.  When the landing pilot was on short final, the departing pilot indicated 
that he was departing.  The witness was flying above the airport and advised the departing pilot 
that an airplane was landing.  The airplanes collided shortly thereafter.  According to 14 CFR 
91.113, Right-of-way rules: Except water operations, "Aircraft, while on final approach to land 
or while landing, have the right-of-way over other aircraft in flight or operating on the surface, 
except that they shall not take advantage of this rule to force an aircraft off the runway surface 
which has already landed and is attempting to make way for an aircraft on final approach."
The departing pilot's inadequate visual lookout.
On January 1, 2008, about 1430 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA 28-180 low-wing airplane, 
N8037W, and a Barnard/Stancil Glastar high-wing airplane, N15EX, collided in flight at the 
Sonoma County Airport (OQ3), Schellville/Sonoma, California.  Both pilots were operating the 
airplanes under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The private pilot of the Piper, the sole 
occupant, and the commercial pilot and one passenger of the Glastar, were not injured.  The 
Piper sustained minor damage, and the Glastar sustained substantial damage.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for either flight.  The pilots of 
both airplanes were attending a fly-in at the airport.
The Piper pilot reported that he entered the right downwind leg of the traffic pattern for 
runway 07 and announced his position.  Then, he announced that he was turning right base for 
runway 07.  As he turned onto the final approach leg, he announced his position and that he 
was landing on runway 07.  He noticed an airplane about 100 feet from the runway, facing east 
(away from the pilot).  As the pilot continued his descent, he heard the sound of an airplane 
engine.  Within 1 to 2 seconds, he felt contact between his airplane and another airplane.  He 
looked out of the right window and saw an airplane next to his, turning away and climbing.  He 
noticed that the top portion of the other airplane's rudder sustained impact damage.
According to the Glastar pilot, he was waiting for an airplane to land on runway 25 so he was 
holding at the end of runway 07.  When the airplane cleared the runway, the pilot announced 
his intentions to depart and began his takeoff roll.  As the airplane became airborne, he heard 
someone transmit over the frequency that he had someone above him.  The pilot looked up and 
saw the right main gear of an airplane about six feet above him.  The pilot attempted to side 
slip to the right; however, the airplanes collided.  The Glastar pilot continued to fly the airplane 
and did not have any rudder authority.  He diverted to Napa County Airport because they had a 
larger runway available.  The landing was made without further incident.
The Safety Board investigator interviewed a witness who was attending the fly in.  The witness 
was the pilot of an airplane that was the second airplane in a flight of two.  The lead airplane 
was just entering the right downwind for runway 07 and the witness was directly over the 
airport at midfield.  He saw the Piper on downwind, base, and then on the final approach leg.  
As the Piper was on final, the Piper pilot made a broadcast that he was landing on runway 07.  
When the Piper was on short final, the witness heard another pilot say, "...rolling 07."  The 
witness looked down and saw a Glastar rolling down the runway and the Piper nearly over the 
top of him.  The witness transmitted to the Glastar pilot that there was an airplane landing on 
the runway.  The airplanes then collided and the Glastar went to the right while climbing and 
the Piper landed uneventfully.  After attempting to land at Schellville but not being able to due 
to a lack of rudder authority, the Glastar landed uneventfully at a nearby airport.
The witness stated that the runup area for runway 07 is situated at the beginning of runway 07.  
Following a runup, a pilot can depart straight from the run up area onto the runway.  The 
witness further indicated that it is widely known that airplanes operating at the Antique Fly-In 
may not have radios and/or electrical systems so pilots must remain vigilant of other traffic in 
the area, especially during fly-in activities.
According to 14 CFR 91.113, Right-of-way rules: Except water operations, "Aircraft, while on 
final approach to land or while landing, have the right-of-way over other aircraft in flight or 
operating on the surface, except that they shall not take advantage of this rule to force an 
aircraft off the runway surface which has already landed and is attempting to make way for an 
aircraft on final approach."
