The airline transport pilot and nine passengers were departing in a twin-engine airplane on a 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 air taxi flight from a runway adjacent to an ocean bay. 
According to the air traffic control tower specialist on duty, the airplane became airborne about 
midway down the runway. As it approached the end of the runway, the pilot said he needed to 
return to the airport, but gave no reason. The specialist cleared the airplane to land on any 
runway. As the airplane began a right turn, it rolled sharply to the right and began a rapid, 
nose- and right-wing-low descent. The airplane crashed about 200 yards offshore and the 
fragmented wreckage sank in the 10-foot-deep water. Survivors were rescued by a private float 
plane. A passenger reported that the airplane's nose baggage door partially opened just after 
takeoff, and fully opened into a locked position when the pilot initiated a right turn towards the 
airport. The nose baggage door is mounted on the left side of the nose, just forward of the 
pilot's windscreen. When the door is opened, it swings upward, and is held open by a latching 
device. To lock the baggage door, the handle is placed in the closed position and the handle is 
then locked by rotating a key lock, engaging a locking cam. With the locking cam in the locked 
position, removal of the key prevents the locking cam from moving. The original equipment 
key lock is designed so the key can only be removed when the locking cam is engaged. 
Investigation revealed that the original key lock on the airplane's forward baggage door had 
been replaced with an unapproved thumb-latch device. A Safety Board materials engineer's 
examination revealed evidence that a plastic guard inside the baggage compartment, which is 
designed to protect the door's locking mechanism from baggage/cargo, appeared not to be 
installed at the time of the accident. The airplane manufacturer's only required inspection of 
the latching system was a visual inspection every 100 hours of service. Additionally, the 
mechanical components of the forward baggage door latch mechanism were considered "on 
condition" items, with no predetermined life-limit. On May 29, 2008, the Federal Aviation 
Administration issued a safety alert for operators (SAFO 08013), recommending a visual 
inspection of the baggage door latches and locks, additional training of flight and ground 
crews, and the removal of unapproved lock devices. In July 2008, Piper Aircraft issued a 
mandatory service bulletin (SB 1194, later 1194A), requiring the installation of a key lock 
device, mandatory recurring inspection intervals, life-limits on safety-critical parts of forward 
Page 2 of 15ANC08MA038
baggage door components, and the installation of a placard on the forward baggage door with 
instructions for closing and locking the door to preclude an in-flight opening. Postaccident 
inspection discovered no mechanical discrepancies with the airplane other than the baggage 
door latch. The airplane manufacturer's pilot operating handbook did not contain emergency 
procedures for an in-flight opening of the nose baggage door, nor did the operator's pilot 
training program include instruction on the proper operation of the nose baggage door or 
procedures to follow in case of an in-flight opening of the door. Absent findings of any other 
mechanical issues, it is likely the door locking mechanism was not fully engaged and/or the 
baggage shifted during takeoff, and contacted the exposed internal latching mechanism, 
allowing the cargo door to open. With the airplane operating at a low airspeed and altitude, the 
open baggage door would have incurred additional aerodynamic drag and further reduced the 
airspeed. The pilot's immediate turn towards the airport, with the now fully open baggage 
door, likely resulted in a sudden increase in drag, with a substantive decrease in airspeed, and 
an aerodynamic stall.
The failure of company maintenance personnel to ensure that the airplane's nose baggage door 
latching mechanism was properly configured and maintained, resulting in an inadvertent 
opening of the nose baggage door in flight. Contributing to the accident were the lack of 
information and guidance available to the operator and pilot regarding procedures to follow 
should a baggage door open in flight and an inadvertent aerodynamic stall.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 5, 2008, about 1343 Alaska standard time, a twin-engine Piper PA-31-350 
airplane, N509FN, received substantial damage when it collided with ocean water following a 
loss of control shortly after takeoff from Runway 36 at the Kodiak Airport, Kodiak, Alaska. The 
airplane was being operated by Servant Air, Inc., Kodiak, as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-
demand charter flight under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 
135, when the accident occurred. Of the 10 people aboard, the airline transport pilot and 5 
passengers died at the scene, 3 passengers sustained serious injuries, and 1 passenger 
sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight 
following procedures were in effect.  The flight was en route to Homer, Alaska.  
During an initial hospital room interview with the National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on January 5, about 2200, a passenger related that the 
purpose of the flight was to transport a group of commercial fishermen from Kodiak to Homer 
for Russian Christmas. He added that many of the passengers were family members that lived 
in the same community near Homer.     
The passenger stated that he was seated in the third row on the right side of the airplane. He 
said that shortly after becoming airborne, he saw the airplane's nose baggage door open 
slightly, which he said initially startled the pilot.  He said that while the airplane was still over 
the departure end of Runway 36, the pilot initiated a shallow right turn, presumably to return 
to the airport.  He said that as soon as the pilot started the right turn, the baggage door swung 
open to the full open position, and it remained in that position. The passenger said that as the 
airplane continued the right turn, it rolled sharply to the right, and began a rapid, nose and 
right wing low descent. It collided with the water adjacent to the departure end of Runway 36.  
The passenger said that during the collision the fuselage fragmented, and the airplane sank 
shortly after impact. He said that he was able to free himself from the sinking wreckage by 
swimming though a large void in the airplane's fuselage. 
According to the contract Air Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) specialist that was on duty at the 
time of the accident, the accident airplane departed from runway 36, and became airborne 
about midway along the 5,013-foot long runway. The ATCT specialist said that as the airplane 
continued to climb approaching the departure end of the runway, the pilot calmly stated that 
he needed to return to the airport, but gave no reason for his need to return. The ATCT 
specialist reported that as the airplane began a right turn, it began a steep roll to the right, and 
descended nose-low into the water. He said that immediately after witnessing the accident, he 
alerted airport fire rescue crew of the accident, and contacted the U.S. Coast Guard's Air 
Station Kodiak, which is located adjacent to the Kodiak airport.   
The ATCT specialist noted that just after the accident, another Kodiak-based operator in a 
float-equipped de Havilland DHC-2 Beaver airplane contacted him on the tower radio 
frequency and said, in part: "[Kodiak] tower, Beaver five forty five's by the Crash Harbor, um 
can I help there?" The ATCT specialist responded by saying: "Beaver five forty five, yeah, you 
may be able to uh, you may be the first one that can get to those people that are in the water, 
they are right off the approach end of runway one eight, just off Buskin Beach, and uh you can 
transition into the airspace at your discretion." The ATCT specialist said that the pilot of the 
float-equipped de Havilland DHC-2 went directly to the accident site, then landed near the 
partially submerged wreckage. 
During an interview with the NTSB IIC, on January 8, the pilot of the de Havilland DHC-2 
Beaver airplane reported that at the time of the accident he was doing a postmaintenance 
engine run following a 100-hour inspection of his airplane. He said that while parked in a bay 
locally known as "Crash Harbor" adjacent to the Kodiak Airport, he initially overheard the 
radio conversation between the accident pilot and ATCT specialist, followed by the 
conversations between the ATCT specialist and the fire rescue crews, so he offered his 
assistance.  
The pilot said that once he found the partially submerged wreckage, he landed, and then taxied 
close as he could to the sinking wreckage. He said he discovered two passengers swimming in 
the water next to the submerged wreckage, and two other passengers clinging to the airplane's 
exposed vertical stabilizer. He said that wind conditions at the time of the rescue made it very 
difficult to maneuver his airplane next to the wreckage. Once he had the four severely 
hypothermic passengers aboard, he departed to the north, and flew directly to the Kodiak boat 
harbor where an ambulance was waiting. The pilot noted that when he departed the accident 
site, no other passengers were visible on the surface of the water.       
Pilot Preflight 
During an interview with the NTSB IIC on January 8, an employee of Servant Air reported that 
the accident pilot loaded the airplane himself, while his passengers waited in the operator's 
lounge. The employee noted that he watched the pilot load various items into the forward 
baggage area, closed and latched the baggage door, then continued loading the remaining 
items in the aft baggage area, and wing lockers. He said that when the pilot was done loading 
the airplane, he saw him do a "walk around" the entire airplane. He said that when the pilot 
approached the forward baggage area, the pilot slide his open left hand across the closed door, 
then while making a loose fist, he lightly tapped the door, just above the door's handle and lock 
assembly, then continued around the airplane's right wing.            
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
