National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PHOENIX, AZ
Accident Number: LAX94LA209
Date & Time: 05/01/1994, 1430 MST
Registration: N1454S
Aircraft: CESSNA 182P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot completed the preflight inspection of the aircraft and loaded his passengers on board.
The aircraft had been idle for about a month.
On the first start attempt, the engine turned over very slowly and the pilot discontinued the start cycle.
The pilot got out of the aircraft to pull the propeller through several revolutions and, as he did so, the engine suddenly started and went to a high power setting.
The pilot said he tried to get back into the cockpit, but he had trouble with the door latch.
The pilot next attempted to restrain the aircraft by holding the tail, but he was knocked to the ground in the effort.
The aircraft ran into a hangar, bending a wing spar.
The pilot said that on reflection he believes that he forgot to turn off the magnetos completely before trying to turn the propeller through the revolutions.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to ensure that the magneto switch was in the off position prior to rotating the propeller by hand.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: STANDING - STARTING ENGINE(S) Findings 1.
OBJECT - BUILDING(NONRESIDENTIAL) 2.
(C) POWERPLANT CONTROLS - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 1, 1994, at 1430 mountain standard time, a Cessna 182P, N1454S, collided with a hangar at the Deer Valley Airport, Phoenix, Arizona.
The aircraft ran away from the pilot after the engine inadvertently started while the pilot was pulling the propeller through several compression cycles.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the operation.
The airplane incurred substantial wing damage.
The certificated private pilot incurred minor injuries; however, the two passengers on board the aircraft were not injured.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident as a personal cross-country flight to Tucson, Arizona.
In a verbal statement, the pilot reported that he had completed the preflight inspection of the aircraft and loaded his passengers on board.
The aircraft had been idle for about a month.
On the first start attempt, the engine turned over very slowly and the pilot discontinued the start cycle.
The pilot got out of the aircraft to pull the propeller through several revolutions and, as he did so, the engine suddenly started and went to a high power setting.
The pilot said he tried to get back into the cockpit, but he had trouble with the door latch.
The pilot next attempted to restrain the aircraft by holding the tail, but he was knocked to the ground in the effort.
The aircraft ran into a hangar, bending a wing spar.
During his statement, the pilot said that on reflection he believes that he forgot to turn off the magnetos completely before trying to turn the propeller through the revolutions.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 35, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Unknown Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
