National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BUCKEYE, AZ
Accident Number: LAX94LA207
Date & Time: 05/01/1994, 1915 MST
Registration: NONE
Aircraft: GRIFFIN TITAN TORNADO
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis Witnesses stated that the student pilot, who had no confirmed flight experience, assembled the aircraft on the day of the accident at the airport from a kit of preassembled major components.
The pilot told the witnesses that he was going to perform some taxi tests and proceeded to do several taxi runs along the runway.
The aircraft was then observed to line up on the runway, add what was described as full power, then takeoff.
The witnesses said the aircraft leveled off about 30 feet above the runway and flew down the complete length of the pavement.
Past the departure end of the runway, the aircraft abruptly pitched nose down and impacted the ground about 1,000 feet from the runway end.
An FAA inspector reported that control system continuity was established throughout the aircraft during his examination.
The witnesses reported that the engine sounds were consistent and strong up to the point of ground impact.
A review of FAA system records revealed no evidence of a registration or airworthiness certificate application by the pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain control of the aircraft.
A factor in the accident was his complete lack of any flight experience or instruction.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The accident occurred during the first test flight following construction of the aircraft.
The aircraft was owned, constructed, and flown by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and included calm winds.
The aircraft was destroyed in the ground collision sequence.
The pilot, who held a student pilot certificate and was the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident for a local test flight.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector from the Scottsdale, Arizona, Flight Standards District Office responded to the accident site where he examined the wreckage and interviewed witnesses.
The witnesses stated that the pilot, who had no confirmed flight experience, assembled the aircraft on the day of the accident at the airport from a kit of preassembled major components.
The pilot told the witnesses that he was going to perform some taxi tests and proceeded to do several taxi runs along the runway.
The aircraft was then observed to line up on the runway, add what was described as full power, then takeoff.
The witnesses said the aircraft leveled off about 30 feet above the runway and flew down the complete length of the pavement.
Past the departure end of the runway, the aircraft abruptly pitched nose down and impacted the ground about 1,000 feet from the runway end.
The inspector reported that control system continuity was established throughout the aircraft during his examination.
The witnesses reported that the engine sounds were consistent and strong up to the point of ground impact.
A review of FAA system records revealed no evidence of a registration or airworthiness certificate application by the pilot.
An autopsy and toxicological tests were performed by the Maricopa County Medical Examiner's Office.
The toxicological tests were negative for alcohol and screened drug substances.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 47, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
