Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Titusville, FL
Accident Number:
ATL03LA040
Date & Time:
02/02/2003, 1206 EST 
Registration:
N9769L
Aircraft:
Beech A24R
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot advanced the throttle for takeoff until the throttle was completely in and at the hub. 
He initially noted the rpm showed 2,300, rpm and during the takeoff roll the rpm showed 
2,500 rpm. The Pilot's Operating Handbook states that full throttle 2,700 rpm is required for 
takeoff.  The throttle slipped back about 1/2 inch on two different occasions, and the pilot 
pushed the throttle back in. No increase in engine power was noted and he continued the 
takeoff roll. Once airborne, the pilot retracted the landing gear and continued applying full 
throttle. The throttle felt like it was sticking and the engine was not producing full power. The 
airplane reached about 75 to 100 feet, and was not climbing.  The pilot realized he would not 
clear wires and trees to his immediate front and applied aft pressure on the control yoke to 
decrease his airspeed and the impending impact. Examination of the airplane wreckage 
revealed the throttle cable was hard to move and fractured. The throttle cable was removed, 
and forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory. The examination revealed the fractures were 
typical of bending overstress while the cable was under a tension load. No determination was 
made for the loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.  The pilot's failure to attain full power for 
takeoff in accordance with the operation handbook was a  factor.
Page 2 of 6ATL03LA040
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN
Findings
1. (F) FLIGHT MANUALS - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
3. OBJECT - WIRE,STATIC
4. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6ATL03LA040
Factual Information
On February 2, 2003, at 1206 eastern standard time, a Beech A24R, N9769L, registered to a 
private owner, collided with wires and trees on initial takeoff climb from runway 09 at Space 
Coast Regional Airport, Titusville, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
private pilot reported serious injuries and the three passengers reported minor injuries. The 
flight originated from Titusville, Florida, on February 2, 2003, at 1205.
The pilot advanced the throttle for takeoff until the throttle was completely in and at the hub. 
He initially noted the rpm showed 2,300, rpm and during the takeoff roll the rpm showed 
2,500 rpm. The throttle slipped back about 1/2 inch on two different occasions, and he pushed 
the throttle back in. No increase in engine power was noted and he continued the takeoff roll. 
The pilot stated he probably had enough runway left to stop the airplane if he had aborted the 
takeoff soon enough. Once airborne, the pilot retracted the landing gear and continued 
applying full throttle. The throttle felt like it was sticking and the engine was not producing full 
power. The airplane reached about 75 to 100 feet, and was not climbing. The wind was out of 
the south and the pilot started a turn. The pilot stated he knew the airplane was not going to 
clear the wires and trees. The pilot applied aft pressure on the control yoke to decrease his 
airspeed and lessen the impending collision. 
The controller in charge at Space Coast Regional Tower stated the pilot departed from runway 
9. The ground run appeared to be slow. The airplane rotated and climbed to about 15 to 20 feet 
above the runway and flew straight ahead. Just before colliding with wires and trees he 
observed the nose of the airplane to pitch up.
Review of  the Pilot's Operating Handbook, Section II Limitations, Power Plant Limitations 
states, "Take-off and Maximum Continuous Power......... Full throttle or 2700 rpm, whichever 
occurs first." Section IV Normal Procedures states, "Takeoff.....................Full throttle- 2700 
RPM."
Examination of the crash site revealed the throttle cable was hard to move and would not move 
through the full range of travel. The cable was removed and visually inspected. The inner cable 
separated near the swaged assembly connected to the throttle handle. The throttle cable 
assembly was forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further analysis. Examination 
revealed the inner cable was fractured near the cockpit end of the assembly. Magnified optical 
examination of the fracture area revealed the seven individual wires of the inner cable were all 
deformed in a common direction adjacent to the fracture. The fractures were all typical 
overstress breaks, and there was no evidence of wear or corrosion deterioration at the fracture 
location. Fracture features and associated deformation were consistent with a bending 
overstress fracture while the cable was under a tension load.
Review of the airplane logbooks revealed the throttle cable had not been replaced since the 
airplane was manufactured. The engine control cables were lubed on  October 7, 2001, and the 
last annual inspection was on November 11, 2002. The total time on the throttle cable at the 
time of the accident was 4,533 hours.
The aircraft wreckage was released to the registered owner on February 4, 2003. The throttle 
cable assembly was released to Atlanta Air Recovery, Griffin, Georgia, on April 30, 2003.
Page 4 of 6ATL03LA040
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/03/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/11/2001
Flight Time:
850 hours (Total, all aircraft), 500 hours (Total, this make and model), 800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N9769L
Model/Series:
A24R 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
MC109
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/06/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
25 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4533 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-A1B
Registered Owner:
Steven J. Halm
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
Steven J. Halm
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ATL03LA040
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TIX, 34 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1149 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 20000 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.15 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Titusville, FL (TIX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Reidsville, NC (78N)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1205 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Space Coast Regional (TIX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
30 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
09
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5001 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 3 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
28.513889, -80.797222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Carrol A Smith
Adopted Date:
09/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Albert Kimball; Orlando FSDO; Orlando, FL
Edward G Rogalski; Textron Lycoming; Belleview, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ATL03LA040
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
