National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Koyukuk, AK
Accident Number: ANC04LA018
Date & Time: 01/02/2004, 1630 AST
Registration: N45008
Aircraft: Piper PA-31-350
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The Title 14, CFR Part 135 cargo flight departed for a destination airport about 20 miles downriver.
Although weather at the departure airport was VFR, no reports of the actual weather along the route of flight were available.
Unable to locate the destination airport due to deteriorating weather conditions, the pilot attempted to return to the departure airport following the river for ground reference.
The airplane entered fog and whiteout weather conditions, and collided in-flight with the frozen surface of the river.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's continued flight into adverse weather conditions, and his failure to maintain clearance from terrain, which resulted in an in-flight collision with terrain.
Factors associated with the accident were fog and whiteout weather conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - WHITEOUT 3.
(C) FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER,FROZEN Factual Information On January 2, 2004, about 1630 Alaska standard time, a Piper PA-31-350 airplane, N45008, sustained substantial damage when it collided with terrain about 3 miles southeast of Koyukuk, Alaska, while maneuvering in whiteout conditions.
The airplane was being operated by Larry's Flying Service, Inc., Fairbanks, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) cargo flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, at the time of the accident.
The solo airline transport pilot was seriously injured.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and company VFR flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight departed Galena, Alaska, about 1620.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on January 2, the chief pilot for the operator said he was tracking the accident flight from Galena to Koyukuk because basic VFR minimums prevailed, and snow showers had been reported along the route of flight.
He said when the flight failed to check in at the anticipated arrival time, he contacted the Koyukuk village agent.
He said the village agent reported hearing the airplane overhead, but a snow shower had reduced the visibility to zero.
When the accident airplane could not be contacted by radio, a search was initiated.
Searchers located the airplane about 3 miles southeast of the village.
According to the chief pilot, the accident pilot said he entered a snow squall and descended along the riverbed trying to maintain visual contact with the ground, and was in whiteout conditions when the airplane collided with terrain.
The airplane sustained structural damage to the wings, fuselage, and tail.
The chief pilot indicated that the accident pilot told him there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
The NTSB IIC had a telephone conversation with the accident pilot on January 8.
During that conversation, the accident pilot reported essentially the same information as the chief pilot.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
