National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Halifax, VA
Accident Number: DFW08CA006
Date & Time: 10/01/2007, 1910 CDT
Registration: N6RP
Aircraft: Vans Aircraft RV6
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot, who was also the builder of the airplane, reported that his approach speed was too high as he was attempting to land at his 1,300-foot-long private airstrip, so he elected to abort the landing.
During the go-around, he applied full power and pitched the nose of the airplane up to establish a climb; however, the installed electronic propeller control sensed an over boost condition and reduced the engine power.
As result of the power reduction, there was not a sufficient power to maintain altitude and as the pilot was attempting to clear obstacles, the airplane's airspeed got too slow.
Subsequently, the airplane stalled and collided with trees.
The pilot further stated that he had forgotten to place the electronic propeller control switch in the manual mode when he applied full power, which would have prevented the loss of power.
The pilot was not injured and was able to egress from the airplane unassisted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadvertent stall during a forced landing.
A contributing factor was the pilot's failure to place the electronic prop controller in the manual mode prior to aborting the landing which resulted in a loss of  engine power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
(F) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
