National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Green Valley, AZ
Accident Number: SEA08LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/2007, 1030 MST
Registration: N6291D
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During cruise flight, the engine suddenly started to run rough and backfire periodically.
The pilot attempted to troubleshoot the rough-running engine without success and decided to initiate a precautionary landing to a nearby road.
During the landing roll, the airplane struck two road signs and a barbwire fence, substantially damaging the left and right wings.
Examination of the engine revealed that the number three cylinder exhaust rocker arm was disconnected from the cylinder due to the rocker arm hold down nut backing off.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power due to the separation of the number three cylinder exhaust rocker arm.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,ROCKER ARM/TAPPET - SEPARATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
(F) OBJECT - SIGN 3.
(F) OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On October 2, 2007, at 1030 mountain standard time, a Cessna 172N, N6291D, sustained substantial damage during a precautionary landing subsequent to a partial loss of engine power near Green Valley, Arizona.
The two occupants, the private pilot and passenger, were not injured.
The aircraft was operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91.
The airplane was owned by Tucson Aeroservice Center of Marina, Arizona.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The local flight originated from Marana Regional Airport, Tucson, Arizona, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that during cruise flight, the engine began to run rough and periodically backfire.
The pilot attempted to troubleshoot the rough running engine without success and initiate a precautionary landing to a nearby road.
The airplane struck two road signs and a barbwire fence during the landing rollout.
Examination of the engine, by the Operator and a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, revealed that the number three cylinder exhaust rocker arm was disconnected from the cylinder due to the rocker arm hold down nut backing off.
Review of aircraft maintenance records showed that 13.4 hours prior to the accident, the number one and three cylinders were removed to facilitate repairs to the cylinder hold down studs.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
