The airplane veered off the runway during landing and impacted a ditch.  The pilot stated that 
he attempted to correct to the left when the airplane veered hard to the right upon touchdown.  
Examination of the accident site revealed two sets of skid marks on the runway and two sets of 
tire marks through the adjacent grass area that preceded the airplane.  Both tire skids/marks 
were similar.  None of the tires had flat spotting and all of the tires were in good condition.  The 
airplane came to rest about 57 feet from the left side of the runway, facing about 180 degrees 
opposite to runway 30.  Operation of the brake system showed no anomalies.  The steering 
system linkage was found to be operative to the nose gear trunnion.  The nose landing gear and 
right main landing gear were collapsed.  All components of the landing gear system were 
present and associated breakage was consistent with impact damage.  
.
Directional control not obtained/maintained by the pilot during landing.  A contributing factor 
was the ditch.
On June 2, 2006, at 1900 central daylight time, a Piper PA-23-250, N63790, piloted by a 
private pilot, received substantial damage upon impact with terrain when the airplane veered 
off runway 30 at Faribault Municipal Airport (FBL), Faribault, Minnesota.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal 
flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The pilot and passenger were not injured.  The flight 
originated from Marshfield Municipal Airport, Marshfield, Wisconsin, at 1745 and was en 
route to FBL.
The pilot stated that after landing on runway 30 (4,254 feet by 72 feet, asphalt), the airplane 
veered "hard" to the right even after attempting to correct towards the left.  The airplane then 
traversed the runway and impacted a ditch.  The pilot stated that the propellers struck the 
ground when the airplane impacted the ditch.  
Examination of the accident site by the Federal Aviation Administration revealed two sets of 
skid marks on the runway and two sets of tire marks through the adjacent grass area that 
preceded the airplane.  Both tire skids/marks were similar.  None of the tires had flat spotting 
and all of the tires were in good condition.  The airplane came to rest about 57 feet from the left 
side of the runway, facing about 180 degrees opposite to runway 30.  The nose landing gear 
and main landing gear were collapsed.  Operation of the brake system showed no anomalies.  
The steering system linkage was found to be operative to the nose gear trunnion.  All 
components of the landing gear system were present and associated breakage was consistent 
with impact damage.  
