National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ANDOVER, KS
Accident Number: CHI98LA294
Date & Time: 08/01/1998, 1915 CDT
Registration: N127X
Aircraft: Piper 20
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor, 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that at an altitude of 60 to 70 feet above the ground a sudden loss of power occurred followed by a 'rapid descent' into a line of trees at the north end of the runway.
The right wing of the airplane contacted a large cedar tree at a height of about 15 to 18 feet above the ground.
Post accident inspection of the airplane failed to reveal any reason for the loss of power.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: a loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
A factor associated with the accident were the trees which the airplane contacted and the low altitude at which the loss of power occurred.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
(F) ALTITUDE - LOW ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
The pilot reported a loss of engine power on takeoff.
The pilot and two passengers were not injured.
Two remaining passengers received minor injuries.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The local flight was departing at the time of takeoff.
The pilot reported that everything appeared normal during the aircraft preflight, engine run- up, taxi, and initial takeoff.
He reported that at an altitude of 60 to 70 feet above the ground a sudden loss of power occurred followed by a "rapid descent" into a line of trees at the north end of the runway.
According to the Butler County Sheriff's Office, the right wing of the airplane contacted a large cedar tree at a height of about 15 to 18 feet above the ground.
Their report states, "This caused the plane to spin or turn toward the east throwing it down onto the highway onto the left side of the plane crashing the wing and left side of the plane onto the roadway."
The airplane came to rest on SW70th on a easterly heading.
The airplane was examined by inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration Wichita, Kansas, Flight Standards District Office.
Their inspection of the engine failed to reveal any reason for the loss of power.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 34, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
