National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OSHKOSH, WI
Accident Number: CHI98LA297B
Date & Time: 08/01/1998, 1840 CDT
Registration: N122BP
Aircraft: Preece VANS RV-6
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot of the other airplane was taxiing for departure on a north-south taxiway for a departure from runway 18R.
He reported that the ATIS advised all traffic to watch the flagmen for ATC instructions.
The pilot reported that he was watching the flagman as instructed.
The pilot reported, 'The flagman gave me a signal to stop as I approached the intersection, and then changed to the right turn signal.
I started my right turn.
The flagman gave me no indication that there was an aircraft in my path, or that I should do anything other than complete the turn.'
He reported that he was about halfway through the turn when his propeller struck the right wingtip of the RV-6.
He reported, 'I was confident that this area was clear because the flagman, with a clear view, directed me to make the turn.'
The pilot of the RV-6 was not aware of the conflict until the Cessna's propeller hit the right wing and aileron of his airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot of the other airplane did not maintain proper clearance.
Findings Occurrence #1: COLLISION BETWEEN AIRCRAFT (OTHER THAN MIDAIR) Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT OF OTHER AIRCRAFT Factual Information See Narrative for accident CHI98LA297A.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
