National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CULPEPER, VA
Accident Number: IAD98LA088
Date & Time: 08/01/1998, 1410 EDT
Registration: N89074
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis According to the student pilot, as he began the takeoff roll on runway 4, the airplane started to yaw to the left.
He said the throttle was at full power, and he corrected with right rudder, but the airplane continued off the left side of the runway, onto the grass, struck a ditch and nosed over.
He reported over 30 hours of total flight experience, including 17 hours in make and model, and 7 hours of solo flight experience.
He also reported that there was no mechanical malfunction with the airplane or the engine.
The reported weather at the time of the accident was winds from 020 at 10 knots with wind gusts to 14 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Failure to maintain directional control during the takeoff roll.
A related factor was wind gusts.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Factual Information On August 1, 1998, at 1410 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 152, N89074, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain during the takeoff roll at the Culpeper County Airport, Culpeper, Virginia.
The certificated student pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed.
The local, instructional flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, as he began the takeoff roll on runway 4, the airplane started to yaw to the left.
He said the throttle was at full power, and he corrected with right rudder, but the airplane continued off the left side of the runway, onto the grass, struck a ditch and nosed over.
The pilot reported over 30 hours of total flight experience, including 17 hours in make and model, and 7 hours of solo flight experience.
He also reported that there was no mechanical malfunction with the airplane or the engine.
The reported weather at the time of the accident was winds from 020 at 10 knots with wind gusts to 14 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 29, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
