National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OSHKOSH, WI
Accident Number: CHI98LA297A
Date & Time: 08/01/1998, 1840 CDT
Registration: N111WF
Aircraft: Cessna 180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was taxiing for departure on a north-south taxiway for a departure from runway 18R.
He reported that the ATIS advised all traffic to watch the flagmen for ATC instructions.
The pilot reported that he was watching the flagman as instructed.
The pilot reported, 'The flagman gave me a signal to stop as I approached the intersection, and then changed to the right turn signal.
I started my right turn.
The flagman gave me no indication that there was an aircraft in my path, or that I should do anything other than complete the turn.'
He reported that he was about halfway through the turn when his propeller struck the right wingtip of the RV-6.
He reported, 'I was confident that this area was clear because the flagman, with a clear view, directed me to make the turn.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to maintain clearance from the other airplane while taxiing.
Findings Occurrence #1: COLLISION BETWEEN AIRCRAFT (OTHER THAN MIDAIR) Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On August 1, 1998, at 1840 central daylight time, a Cessna 180, N111WF, operated by Fletcher Aviation Inc., taxiied into the right wing of an experimental Preece VANS RV-6, N122BP.
The RV-6 was number three holding short for takeoff from runway 18 at Oshkosh Municipal Airport, Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
The Cessna 180 was turning on the taxiway when its propeller impacted the right wing of the RV-6.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot was taxiing for departure on a north-south taxiway for a departure from runway 18R.
He reported that the ATIS advised all traffic to watch the flagmen for ATC instructions.
He reported that he saw an RV-6 taxi across the front of his airplane when he was about 400 to 500 feet from the intersection.
The pilot reported that he was watching the flagman as instructed.
The pilot reported, "The flagman have me a signal to stop as I approached the intersection, and then changed to the right turn signal.
I started my right turn.
The flagman game me no indication that there was an aircraft in my path, or that I should do anything other than complete the turn."
He reported that he was about halfway through the turn when his propeller struck the right wingtip of the RV-6.
He reported, "I was confident that this area was clear because the flagman, with a clear view, directed me to make the turn."
The pilot reported that the Cessna 180, a tail wheel airplane, had a blind spot directly in front and to the right when piloting the airplane from the left seat.
The pilot of the RV-6 reported that he was not aware of the conflict until the Cessna's propeller hit the right wing and aileron of his airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2550 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 40 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4714 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-470-U Registered Owner: FLETCHER AVIATION INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
