Page 1 of 11
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Payson, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR17FA045
Date & Time:
01/02/2017, 0937 MST 
Registration:
N272EF
Aircraft:
CESSNA T210K
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
VFR encounter with IMC
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The non-instrument-rated private pilot departed his home airport with three family members 
on a cross-country visual flight rules (VFR) flight over mountainous terrain. The forecast 
weather conditions called for instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and mountain 
obscuration due to clouds, precipitation, and mist along the route of flight and at the accident 
site. The co-owner of the airplane, who held an instrument rating, had reviewed the pilot's 
flight plan and the forecast weather conditions two days before the accident and informed the 
pilot that he should drive to his destination as the weather would not allow for VFR flight. 
However, the pilot elected to proceed with the flight contrary to the co-owner's 
recommendation. The pilot entered the flight route into the Foreflight mobile application but 
did not receive any weather briefings from flight service or the mobile application before 
departure.
GPS data recovered from an electronic display device installed in the airplane showed that the 
airplane departed, entered a climb on a northerly heading, and maintained this direction for 
the remainder of the flight. After the airplane reached a peak altitude of about 8,000 ft above 
mean sea level (msl), it descended to 7,000 ft msl and then gradually descended to about 6,000 
ft msl, where it remained until near the end of the flight. The airplane subsequently impacted 
the tops of trees on the rising face of a cliff about 6,600 ft msl. The orientation and length of 
the wreckage path were consistent with a controlled flight into terrain impact. Track data from 
the GPS showed that the airplane maintained a straight course after its departure all the way to 
the mountain rim, which had a published elevation between 6,700 feet msl and 8,000 feet msl. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions or failures.
A medical study revealed that each of the 4 fatally injured occupants sustained severe 
traumatic injuries that would have been rapidly fatal. Furthermore, the study showed there was 
no evidence to suggest that faster identification of the accident or earlier medical attention 
would have changed the outcome. 
Page 2 of 11WPR17FA045
Although the autopilot switch was found in the "ON" position at the accident site, the autopilot 
was likely not engaged as the airplane's ground track and altitude varied, consistent with the 
pilot hand flying the airplane. 
A weather study revealed that the airplane departed in visual meteorological conditions (VMC) 
and likely entered a combination of VMC and IMC after it climbed above 7,000 ft. Minutes 
later, the airplane encountered IMC and did not return to VMC for the remainder of the flight. 
The pilot's descent from 8,000 ft to 7,000 ft and then to 6,000 ft, occurred after the airplane 
entered IMC and indicates that he may have been attempting to return to VMC by descending, 
but was unsuccessful. Upon encountering IMC, the pilot could have turned around and 
returned to VMC, but he elected to continue and descend about 750 feet below the lowest peak 
terrain elevation in the area. The airplane's altitude increased rapidly by about 500 ft just 
seconds before the airplane impacted terrain suggesting that the pilot may have been alerted by 
the onboard terrain awareness warning system, which had been successfully tested by the co-
owner, or observed the terrain and maneuvered to avoid the impact. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The non-instrument-rated pilot's improper decisions to begin and to continue a flight under 
visual flight rules into instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in controlled flight 
into terrain.
Findings
Personnel issues
Qualification/certification - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Below VFR minima - Decision related to condition (Cause)
Mountainous/hilly terrain - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 11WPR17FA045
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute
VFR encounter with IMC (Defining event)
Loss of visual reference
Controlled flight into terr/obj (CFIT)
On January 2, 2017, about 0937 mountain standard time, a Cessna T210K, N272EF, was 
destroyed when it collided with mountainous terrain near Payson, Arizona. The private pilot 
and three passengers were fatally injured. The airplane was registered to N9402M Aviation, 
LLC, of Phoenix, Arizona. The personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 
14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country flight that 
departed Scottsdale Airport (SDL), Scottsdale, Arizona, at 0912 and was destined for Telluride, 
Colorado.
According to the co-owner of the airplane, the pilot planned to fly from SDL, where the 
airplane was based, to Colorado with his family for their annual vacation.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) provided a radar track for an airplane with a 1200 
transponder code that corresponded with the airplane's departure time and route. The radar 
data indicated that the airplane departed SDL at 0912 and proceeded north. The final radar 
target was at 0937:39, at a Mode C altitude of 6,700 ft mean sea level (msl), and about 0.07 
nautical miles (nm) east of the accident site. According to the FAA, the pilot did not receive 
VFR flight following services or contact any of the low altitude sectors along his route of flight.
An Electronics International MVP-50P electronic display device was recovered from the 
wreckage and forwarded to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Vehicle 
Recorders Laboratory for data recovery. The small battery used to power the unit's internal 
clock had become dislodged, and the unit reverted to an unset time setting. As a result, the 
flight and engine data time stamps in this report differ by about 20-minutes from the actual 
time derived from the FAA radar data.
Engine data retrieved from the MVP-50P indicated that the fuel flow, manifold pressure, and 
rpm increased at 09:33:05, consistent with departure performance. GPS and flight data 
retrieved from the unit showed the airplane's groundspeed rise from 0 knots and its altitude 
increase from 1,437 ft, which is about SDL's field elevation, consistent with a departure. The 
airplane then climbed to the northeast before turning left to a north heading for the remainder 
of the flight. The engine parameters did not indicate any anomalies during the flight. At 
0943:59, the airplane reached a peak altitude of 8,029 ft and subsequently descended to about 
7,850 ft. The airplane maintained this altitude within 30 ft for about 2 minutes and then 
climbed to 7,936 ft briefly before entering a descent and reaching about 6,651 ft at 0947:44. In 
the next minute, the airplane climbed to about 6,900 ft and then, at 0950:28, descended to and 
maintained about 6,200 ft, within 100 ft, for about 2 minutes 30 seconds. The last recorded 
Page 4 of 11WPR17FA045
data occurred while the airplane was in a 10-second climb at 0953:06, a GPS altitude of 6,767 
ft, and about 0.22 nm from the accident site. In the airplane's final 12 seconds of flight, fuel 
flow decreased from about 20 to 17.4 gallons per hour, manifold pressure decreased from 
about 31 to 28 inches of mercury, and rpm remained unchanged.
Track data from the GPS showed that the airplane maintained a straight course after its 
departure all the way to the accident site located at the mountain rim, which had a published 
peak elevation that varied between 6,750 feet msl and 8,077 feet msl.
Family members became concerned on the afternoon of January 2 as they had not heard from 
the flight and were unable to reach the occupants on their cell phones. Around 2100, they 
notified local law enforcement who traced the flight's location using the pilot's and his wife's 
cell phones. An alert notice, or ALNOT, was issued at 2252 by Denver Center, and the wreckage 
was subsequently discovered the following morning at 0427 in a wooded area on the rising face 
of the Mogollon Rim, a cliff that extends across northern Arizona.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/10/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/11/2016
Flight Time:
295 hours (Total, all aircraft)
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating. He did not 
hold an instrument rating. The pilot's most recent third-class medical certificate was issued on 
April 10, 2015, with no limitations. At the time of the exam, the pilot reported that he had 
accumulated 295 total flight hours of which 14 hours were in the previous 6 months.
The last recorded flight in the pilot's logbook was dated August 28 with the remark "Flight 
Review," but the logbook did not indicate the year the flight took place. An entry in the back of 
the logbook showed that the pilot's most recent flight review was conducted on May 11, 2016. 
His previous flight review was dated August 27, 2014.
According to FAA records, the pilot purchased the airplane in 2011. In February 2014, the pilot 
sold 50% of the ownership to an individual who responded to an advertisement that he posted 
on an internet website. This individual stated that he developed a friendship with the pilot 
through their co-ownership of the airplane. He stated that the accident pilot sometimes flew 
Page 5 of 11WPR17FA045
with him as a safety pilot when he practiced instrument approaches, but he did not believe that 
the accident pilot had aspired to become instrument rated. According to the co-owner, the 
accident pilot made less than five total cross-country flights each year, and his local flying 
normally took place ahead of his cross-country flights and was for the purpose of maintaining 
his currency to carry passengers.
The pilot's business partner flew with the pilot on three occasions and observed him watching a 
moving map on an iPad during one of the flights.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N272EF
Model/Series:
T210K K
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1970
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21059302
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/21/2016, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
16 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4307 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental Motors Group
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, 
aided in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-CCR
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1970 and registered to N9402M 
Aviation, LLC on July 22, 2011. The airplane was powered by a turbocharged, direct-drive, air-
cooled, 310-horsepower Continental TSIO-520R engine. A review of the airplane's logbooks 
revealed that the airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on October 21, 2016, 
at a tachometer time and total time of 4,307 hours. The engine logbook indicated that a 100-
hour inspection was completed on October 21, 2016, at which time the engine had accrued 311 
flight hours since major overhaul. At the time of the accident, the tachometer time was 4,323 
hours.
A fuel receipt obtained from Signature Flight Support at SDL showed that the pilot purchased 
42 gallons of 100 LL aviation grade gasoline at 0845 on the day of the accident. The co-owner 
reported that he was the last person to fly the airplane before the accident flight. He returned 
the airplane with about 44 gallons of fuel onboard about 4 days before the accident.
The owners installed a Garmin 750 GPS that was equipped with a Terrain Awareness Warning 
Page 6 of 11WPR17FA045
System (TAWS) and an engine analyzer in April 2016. The co-owner routinely updated the GPS 
databases and tested the TAWS system.
An estimate of the airplane's weight and balance was computed using the occupants' weights 
reported by the medical examiner. The baggage weight was determined by adding the weight of 
the baggage recovered by the medical examiner to the weight of the baggage that remained 
with the wreckage. The center row left seat had been removed from the airplane, and two 
weight and balance scenarios were computed. The first scenario (labeled "Graph no. 1" in the 
"Weight & Balance Computation" document in the NTSB public docket) assumed that the 218 
pounds of baggage was split between the center and aft rows, and the second scenario (labeled 
"Graph no. 2" in the in the "Weight & Balance Computation" document in the NTSB public 
docket) split the same baggage weight between the center row and the baggage compartment. 
Computations showed the airplane's center of gravity within the moment envelope for both 
scenarios.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PAN, 5156 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
11 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0935 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation; Unknown Obscuration
Departure Point: 
SCOTTSDALE, AZ (SDL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
TELLURIDE, CO (TEX)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0912 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Weather Conditions at Time of Accident
At 0935, the weather conditions recorded at Payson Airport (PAN), Payson, Arizona, elevation 
5,157 feet, located about 11 nm south of the accident site, included wind variable at 4 knots with 
gusts to 10 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, overcast ceiling at 300 ft above ground level (agl), 
temperature 2°C, dew point 1°C, and an altimeter setting of 30.11 inches of mercury.
Visible satellite imagery showed extensive cloud cover over the accident site with the clouds 
moving from west to east. Sounding data and infrared satellite imagery were used to determine 
Page 7 of 11WPR17FA045
the likely cloud cover that the airplane encountered along the route of flight. Figure 1, which 
depicts the cloud cover and the airplane's flight track, shows that the airplane departed in 
visual meteorological conditions (VMC) and entered a combination of IMC/VMC when it 
climbed above 7,000 ft. The airplane then entered IMC when it crossed over the Mazatzal 
Mountains, about 20 nm south of the accident site, and remained in IMC for the rest of the 
flight.
Figure 1 Œ Cloud Cover with height (Color Fill) and Accident Flight Track (Line)
A pilot weather report made near the time of the accident reported cloud tops at 11,000 ft 
about 40 nm west of the accident site. Another report made about 1 hour after the accident 
reported cloud bases between 5,900 ft and 6,400 ft and cloud tops about 8,000 ft about 50 nm 
northwest of the accident site. Pilot reports of light rime icing were made about 90 minutes 
after the accident took place and 45 nm northwest of the accident site.
Weather Forecasts
Airmen's meteorological information (AIRMET) advisories SIERRA and TANGO were issued 
at 0745 and were valid for the accident site at the time of the accident. AIRMET SIERRA 
forecasted IMC and mountain obscuration conditions due to clouds, precipitation, and mist, 
and AIRMET TANGO forecasted moderate turbulence below FL180.
An area forecast issued at 0445 and valid at the time of the accident called for a broken to 
overcast ceiling at 9,000 ft with cloud tops at 10,000 ft and a south wind gusting to 25 knots.
Page 8 of 11WPR17FA045
Sedona Airport, located 35 nm west-northwest of the accident site at an elevation of 4,830 ft, 
issued a terminal aerodrome forecast (TAF) at 0433 that was valid at the time of the accident. 
The TAF called for wind from 180° at 11 knots with wind gusts to 20 knots, greater than 6 miles 
visibility, light rain showers, scattered clouds at 200 ft agl, a broken ceiling at 400 ft agl, and 
overcast skies at 1,200 ft agl.
The National Weather Service office in Flagstaff, Arizona, issued an area forecast discussion 
(AFD) at 0343 that discussed the likelihood of IFR conditions along south- and west-facing 
higher terrain. The AFD specifically mentioned that the Mogollon Rim was likely to have 
scattered light snow, rain, and rain shower conditions.
Weather Briefing
There was no record of the pilot receiving a weather briefing from Lockheed Martin Flight 
Service (LMFS), the Direct User Access Terminal Service (DUATS), or ForeFlight Mobile 
before departure. The pilot did not file a flight plan with ForeFlight Mobile but did enter route 
information at 0826 for a trip from SDL to Telluride Regional Airport. The pilot did not look at 
any weather imagery before or during the flight using ForeFlight, LMFS, or DUATS. It is 
unknown whether the pilot retrieved weather graphics or text weather information from other 
internet sources.
Two days before the accident, the pilot asked the co-owner to research the weather forecast and 
cross-check it against the pilot's flight plan to Telluride. After reviewing his flight plan and 
researching weather, the co-owner informed the pilot that Sunday and Monday, the day before 
and the day of the accident, were not options and suggested that the pilot drive to Telluride. 
The co-owner, who was an instrument-rated pilot, stated that he would not have personally 
flown this route because of the weather forecast.
For further meteorological information, see the weather study in the public docket for this 
investigation.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
34.429722, -111.277778
The airplane came to rest on the south face of the Mogollon Rim about 11 nm north of PAN at 
an elevation of about 6,601 ft. The initial impact point (IIP) was identified by an aluminum 
fragment embedded about midway in a 50-foot-tall tree and several broken tree branches that 
came to rest a few feet beyond the IIP. An initial ground scar was marked by airplane 
Page 9 of 11WPR17FA045
fragments and loose dirt about 40 ft forward of the IIP. Portions of the wings and elevators 
were found along the debris path from the IIP to the main wreckage, about 80 ft from the IIP.
The main wreckage was comprised of the engine, fuselage, and tail section, which was 
displaced about 30° upward from the ground. The rudder, aileron, and elevator cables were 
traced from the cockpit to their respective control surfaces. The flap jackscrew measured about 
4.4 inches, consistent with a flaps retracted position. The elevator trim actuator screw was 
separated from the actuator body.
The airplane was equipped with a 2-point restraint system for each occupant and no shoulder 
harnesses. The passengers' lap belts were each found in the clasped position. Only a portion of 
the pilot's lap belt was recovered and two of the passengers' belts had separated at their 
airframe attachment points. The third passengers' lap belt had been cut by recovery personnel.
Both wing fuel tanks were breached and exhibited an odor that resembled 100 low lead 
aviation grade gasoline. The fuel strainer bowl was removed, and it contained several ounces of 
uncontaminated liquid of a color and odor that resembled aviation grade gasoline. The fuel 
selector valve, which was positioned on the left fuel tank detent, was subsequently rotated to 
each of the three fuel tank ports, and no obstructions were observed.
The vacuum pump functioned normally when manipulated by hand; both vanes and the carbon 
rotor were intact and unremarkable. The autopilot switch was found in the "ON" position.
The engine displayed a dent and several cracks on the rear left side of the crankcase consistent 
with impact damage. All six cylinders remained attached to their cylinder bays. The throttle 
and metering assembly was partially separated from its mount. Multiple ignition leads from 
the ignition harness were severed from their respective spark plugs. The exhaust system 
remained attached to the engine and displayed crush damage. The cabin heat exhaust heat 
exchanger did not display any leaks.
Rotational continuity was established throughout the engine and valve train when the engine 
crankshaft was manually rotated using a hand tool. Thumb compression and suction were 
obtained for all six cylinders. The cylinder combustion chambers and barrels were examined 
with a lighted borescope, and the cylinder bores, valve heads, and piston faces displayed 
normal operation and combustion signatures. The cylinder overhead components, comprised 
of the valves, springs, push rods, and rocker arms, exhibited normal operation and lubrication 
signatures.
An examination of the top and bottom spark plugs revealed varying degrees of impact damage, 
but signatures consistent with normal wear. The oil filter exhibited impact damage; however, 
the filter pleats were not contaminated with metallic debris. The oil sump pickup screen did 
not display any blockage, and the oil pump did not display any anomalies.
Disassembly of the fuel manifold revealed a fluid consistent with aviation grade gasoline inside 
the valve body. While the fuel screen did not display any obstructions, the unfiltered side of the 
valve displayed some contaminates. The fuel nozzles were not obstructed except for nozzle Nos. 
3 and 5, which were impacted with mud and dirt. Fuel nozzle No. 2 was not recovered.
Page 10 of 11WPR17FA045
The throttle body metering unit was removed from its engine accessory housing, and the fuel 
metering portion of the unit was disassembled. The internal components appeared normal, and 
the inlet fuel screen was free of debris with the exception of a trace amount of fibrous material.
The left magneto had separated from its mounting flange, and the magneto housing was 
cracked open exposing its internal components. A small amount of movement was achieved 
through the magneto drive, and the magneto did not produce a spark. The right magneto 
remained attached to the accessory case and was capable of normal rotation through the 
magneto drive. The impulse coupling operated normally and produced spark on all six posts in 
the correct order.
The three-blade, variable-pitch propeller was attached to the propeller flange. Two propeller 
blades were attached to the propeller hub, and the third blade was found in the debris path. 
One blade exhibited "S" bending at the blade tip and aft bending about mid-span. Another 
propeller blade displayed aft bending deformation, and the remaining propeller blade 
exhibited forward bending, leading edge polishing, and a gouge towards the blade root.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Pima County Office of the Medical Examiner, Tucson, Arizona, performed an autopsy on 
the pilot. The autopsy report indicated that the pilot's cause of death was "multiple blunt force 
injuries."
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicological tests on specimens recovered from the pilot. A carboxyhemoglobin 
saturation test revealed no evidence of carbon monoxide in the pilot's cavity blood. The pilot's 
toxicology results were negative for ethanol and positive for tadalafil in his cavity blood. 
Tadalafil, marketed under the trade name Cialis, is used to treat erectile dysfunction and 
symptoms of benign prostatic hypertrophy. Another brand of Tadalafil, marketed under the 
brand name Adcirca, is used to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Additional carboxyhemoglobin tests for two of the three passengers did not indicate a presence 
of carbon monoxide in the heart blood of either occupant. A medical study showed that each of 
the four occupants suffered severe traumatic injuries. 
Tests And Research
Emergency Locator Transmitter
Page 11 of 11WPR17FA045
The airplane was equipped with a Pointer, model 3000, FAA technical standing order type C91 
emergency locator transmitter (ELT), which broadcasts radio signals on the emergency radio 
channel 121.5 MHz. Aircraft receivers monitoring the emergency channel that intercept an ELT 
signal can announce the signal along with their position to Air Traffic Control. According to a 
representative of the FAA, the Albuquerque Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) received 
four ELT reports from aircraft that intercepted ELT signals near PAN between 0938 and 0942 
on the day of the accident. The FAA representative further reported that the four ELT reports 
were immediately forwarded to the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center (AFRCC). The 
reporting of ELT signals is governed by FAA Job Order Chapter 5-2-8, which requires ARTCC 
to send the signal reports directly to AFRCC. 
AFRCC receives Cospas-Sarsat distress alerts sent by the United States Mission Control Center 
and is responsible for coordinating the rescue response to the distress. According to the United 
States Government Federal Register, the Cospas-Sarsat satellite system only processes signals 
from 406 MHz ELTs as they ceased processing signals from 121.5 MHz ELTs beginning 
February 2009. This decision was the result of problems with the frequency band, which 
inundated search and rescue authorities with inaccurate and false alerts, which impacted the 
effectiveness of lifesaving services. 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen R Stein
Adopted Date:
03/14/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Leon Kelley; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Henry Soderlund; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Kurt Gibson; Continental Motors Group; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
03/14/2018
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94553
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
