Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Factual Report
Location:
Gurdon, AR
Accident Number:
CEN17FA071
Date & Time:
01/05/2017, 1239 CST 
Registration:
N972JK
Aircraft:
COLUMBIA AIRCRAFT MFG LC41 
550FG
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On January 5, 2017, about 1239 central standard time, a Columbia Aircraft 400-LC41 airplane, 
N972JK, impacted terrain near Gurdon, Arkansas, after a rapid descent. The private pilot and 
the pilot-rated passenger were fatally injured. The airplane was destroyed from impact forces 
and postcrash fire. The airplane was registered to JMK3 Lands, LLC, and was operated by the 
pilot under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. No flight plan had been filed before the cross-
country personal flight. The flight originated from McKinney National Airport (TKI), 
McKinney, Texas, about 1145 with an intended destination of Macon County Airport (1A5), 
Franklin, North Carolina. 
According to the air traffic control (ATC) transcript and radar information, the airplane was at 
a cruise altitude of 17,500 ft mean sea level (msl) when the pilot requested, at 1217:22, an 
instrument flight rules (IFR) clearance to climb to 25,000 feet msl to do an "equipment test," 
but he did not specify what equipment needed to be tested. The pilot also provided the 
controller with the required information for a "pop up" IFR clearance. Radar data showed that, 
about 1229, the airplane climbed to 25,000 ft; at 1232:21, the pilot requested to descend back 
to 17,500 ft. Radar data showed that the airplane had started to descend before the controller 
could clear the pilot to descend to 19,000 ft. At 1233:03 and 1233:17, the controller asked the 
pilot "is everything alright"? The pilot responded that the airplane was "having a little bit of an 
equipment issue" and requested to cancel the IFR clearance. The controller cleared the pilot to 
descend and maintain 17,000 ft and queried if he needed any assistance. The pilot responded 
that he was "okay right now." At 1236:39, the pilot declared an emergency, and the ATC 
controller requested the pilot to state the nature of the emergency. The pilot's response was 
unintelligible. The controller attempted to contact the airplane but received no response from 
the pilot. The controller asked other airplanes that were operating in the area to try to contact 
the pilot, but no responses were received.
Radar data showed that the airplane had rapidly descended from 20,400 ft at 1236:01 to 3,100 
ft at 1238:13. No further radar returns were recorded, and no distress calls from the airplane 
were heard by ATC or other aircraft operating in the area. The airplane impacted terrain about 
Page 2 of 7CEN17FA071
1239.
According to a report provided by the Clark County, Arkansas, Sheriff's Department, an ATC 
controller contacted the sheriff's department about an airplane in distress. The controller 
indicated that, at the time of the airplane's last known coordinates, the airplane was 5.6 miles 
east of Gurdon, Arkansas. The airplane wreckage was located shortly afterward by the pilot of 
and spotters in an Arkansas State Police helicopter.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 250 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 
24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
36
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/16/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 450 hours (Total, all aircraft), 10 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 
24 hours, all aircraft)
According to FAA records, the pilot held a private pilot certificate issued on September 6, 2016, 
with an airplane single-engine land rating. His most recent third-class medical certificate was 
issued on June 1, 2016, with no limitations. The pilot's flight logbook was not available, but a 
family member estimated that he had about 250 hours of total flight experience and about 100 
hours of flight experience in the accident airplane. Also, this family member stated that the 
pilot had recently bought a "full face" oxygen mask for the airplane and that he and the pilot-
Page 3 of 7CEN17FA071
rated passenger had attended a high altitude/hypoxia training course about 3 weeks before the 
accident. 
FAA records also showed that the pilot-rated passenger held a private pilot certificate issued on 
April 30, 2013, with airplane single-engine land and instrument airplane ratings. His most 
recent third-class medical certificate was issued on September 16, 2015, with no limitations. 
The pilot-rated passenger's flight logbook was not available, but a family member estimated 
that he had about 450 hours of total flight experience and about 10 hours of flight experience in 
the accident airplane. 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
COLUMBIA AIRCRAFT MFG
Registration:
N972JK
Model/Series:
LC41 550FG 550FG
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2007
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
41800
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/02/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
93 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
418 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-550-C
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The airplane, serial number 41800, was manufactured in 2007. Cessna acquired the type 
certificate for the airplane model from Columbia in 2009, and the airplane is sometimes 
referred to as a Cessna Columbia 400. A Continental Motors TSIO550C engine was installed on 
the airplane, and a Hartzell three-blade propeller was installed on the engine. The engine's and 
propeller's most recent 100-hour inspections were completed on June 2, 2016. The airplane 
was also equipped with an anti-ice system and an oxygen system.
According to a family member, the pilot purchased the airplane in August 2016. Before the 
accident flight, the airplane had accumulated 418 hours of flight time. 
A review of the airplane's available maintenance records did not reveal any outstanding issues. 
According to the records, the airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on June 
6, 2016, at an airplane total time of 325.5 hours. 
According to TKI fueling records, the airplane received 62 gallons of fuel at 1107 on the 
morning of the accident. TKI service records showed that the airplane had an oil change and 
Page 4 of 7CEN17FA071
oxygen system service that morning.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ADF, 181 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1156 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
190°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
Unknown / Unknown
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
Unknown / Unknown
Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / -2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
McKinney, TX (TKI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR/IFR
Destination: 
Franklin, NC (1A5)
Type of Clearance:
IFR; VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1145 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
A review of the weather information from of the accident indicated a layer of broken to 
overcast clouds over Texas into Arkansas. A review of the soundings and the local observation 
indicated favorable conditions for broken to overcast clouds between 2,000 and 6,000 ft.
Dexter B. Florence Memorial Airport, Arkadelphia, Arkansas, was the nearest weather 
reporting facility, located about 15 miles south of the accident site. The weather observation for 
1256 indicated the following: wind from 360° at 7 knots; visibility 10 miles or more; ceiling 
broken at 2,400 ft above ground level (agl), overcast at 3,700 ft agl; temperature 3°C, dew 
point -2°C, altimeter 30.01 inches of mercury. Also, a review of the National Weather Service 
in-flight weather advisories near the accident site found none that were current for turbulence, 
icing, or instrument conditions below 24,000 ft.
Page 5 of 7CEN17FA071
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.899444, 93.037222 (est)
The airplane wreckage was found in swampy terrain that was densely vegetated with cypress 
trees. The wreckage was in a 4-ft-deep muddy, water-filled crater. Snowfall after the accident 
covered much of the wreckage. The cypress trees above the crater showed evidence of broken 
limbs at the top of the trees. The airplane was severely fragmented into small pieces, some of 
which were scattered beside the impact crater, and a postimpact fire had ensued. The wreckage 
evidence was consistent with a high-speed, nearly vertical, nose-down impact. The engine was 
extracted from the crater along with the propeller, which was attached to the crankshaft 
propeller flange. The propeller spinner was crushed by impact forces but did not exhibit 
twisting witness characteristics.
The airplane wreckage, engine, and propeller were recovered from the accident site and 
transported to a secure location for further examination by the NTSB, Cessna, and Continental 
Motors.
Airframe
The recovered airframe pieces were laid out to examine the flight controls. Due to the severe 
fragmentation, flight control continuity could only be established from the rudder surface to 
overload separations on the control cables leading to the cockpit. The aft elevator push-pull 
tube was found attached to the elevator torque tube, and the elevator surfaces were found 
separated from the torque tubes due to impact damage. The elevator trim tab was found in 
about a 16° tab down angle. One of the two speedbrake modules was deployed. The airframe 
fuel, environmental, anti-icing, and oxygen systems could not be examined due to the severe 
impact and postcrash fire damage. Cockpit gauges and instruments also could not be examined 
due to impact and postcrash fire damage.
Engine
The ignition harness was impact damaged. The engine could be manually rotated, and 
crankshaft/camshaft continuity was confirmed. All valves opened and closed normally. Thumb 
compression was achieved on all cylinders. Mud and water were expelled from each cylinder 
when the engine was manually rotated.
All six cylinders remained attached at their respective mounts. Cylinder No. 1 exhibited a large 
crack between the induction port and the intake rocker box cover. Cooling fins were impact 
damaged. The rocker box covers exhibited minor impact damage but remained attached to 
each cylinder.
Page 6 of 7CEN17FA071
The engine-driven fuel pump remained intact and attached to its mount on the rear of the 
engine. The fuel hose fittings were damaged from the impact and had separated from the fuel 
pump. The fuel pump drive coupling was found intact. The fuel pump operated smoothly when 
manually rotated, and a small amount of fuel was expelled. The fuel manifold, throttle body, 
and metering unit were intact. Fuel lines from the fuel manifold to individual fuel injectors 
were damaged from the impact, and the fuel injectors remained intact in each cylinder head.
The induction tube for cylinder No. 1 separated during the engine recovery, and the induction 
tubes for the Nos. 2 through 6 cylinders remained attached with varying impact damage. The 
right and left after-cooler assemblies were not recovered. The right forward induction tube 
assembly was impact damaged, and the left forward induction tube had separated. The upper 
deck pressure air manifold tubes were impact damaged. The top and bottom spark plugs were 
removed and inspected, and each spark plug was contaminated with mud from the swamp 
water and oil. A lighted borescope inspection was accomplished, and all valves were found to 
be intact and in place.
The oil cooler was attached, but the mounting base was damaged. The oil sump exhibited 
upward crushing damage due to impact forces. The oil pick-up tube and screen were impact 
damaged. The oil filter remained attached to its mount with the safety wire intact. The oil filter 
was removed and cut open, and the oil filter paper pleats showed no contamination.
The engine was transported to Continental Motors in Mobile, Alabama, for a teardown 
examination under the supervision of the NTSB and with Continental Motors personnel 
present. The teardown examination of the engine revealed no mechanical anomalies. For more 
information, see the engine teardown report in the docket for this accident.
The propeller and turbochargers were transported to Continental Motors for a teardown 
examination under the supervision of the NTSB and with Continental Motors and Hartzell 
Propeller personnel present.
The teardown of the propeller and its assembly revealed no mechanical anomalies that would 
have prevented or degraded normal propeller operation before impact. Preload plate impact 
marks indicated that the propeller was operating in the normal blade angle range at the time of 
impact. Blade bending and twisting were consistent with a low power setting and/or 
windmilling at a high airspeed at the time of impact.
The teardown of the turbochargers revealed no mechanical anomalies that would have 
prevented or degraded normal turbocharger operation before impact. The right turbocharger 
compressor housing was bent in a manner consistent with impact forces, and the impeller was 
impinging on the compressor wheel, preventing rotation. Contact/chatter/rub marks in the 
compressor housing were consistent with low-speed rotation before impact and a low power 
condition. All damage to both turbochargers was consistent with high impact forces.
For more information about the propeller and turbochargers, see the teardown report in the 
docket for this accident.
Page 7 of 7
Medical And Pathological Information
The Arkansas State Crime Laboratory, Medical Examiner Division, Little Rock, Arkansas, 
performed an autopsy of the pilot and the pilot-rated passenger. The cause of death for both 
the pilot and the pilot-rated passenger was multiple injuries.
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicology testing of the pilot. No ethanol or carbon monoxide was detected. 
Amphetamines were detected in urine (6.97 µg/ml, µg/g) and blood specimens (0.42 µg/ml, 
µg/g). Amphetamine is a Schedule II controlled substance available by prescription in various 
forms for the treatment of attention deficit disorders and narcolepsy. It is also a common drug 
of abuse; peak levels in abuse are typically above 0.04 ug/ml in blood and above 10 ug/ml in 
urine. However, amphetamine undergoes significant post mortem redistribution which may 
increase central levels (such as heart levels) by 3-8 times.
Toxicology tests were also performed on the pilot-rated passenger. No ethanol was detected. 
Carbon monoxide tests were not performed. Tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid (marijuana) 
was detected in liver (0.0827 µg/ml, µg/g) and brain specimens (0.0022 µg/ml, µg/g). 
Tetrahydrocannabinol Carboxylic Acid (THC-COOH), the inactive metabolite of THC (the 
primary psychoactive component in marijuana) in liver and brain. However, no parent drug 
(THC) was identified in brain and the liver was unsuitable for further testing.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alexander Lemishko
Additional Participating Persons:
Danny Brickey; FAA FSDO; Little Rock, AR
Mike Council; Continental Engines; Mobile, AL
Ricardo Asensio; Cessna Aircraft; Wichita, KS
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94572
