The pilot stated that during the landing roll the tailwheel began to vibrate.  The vibration 
increased and the airplane made a 'sharp yaw to the left.'  After about 30 degrees of turn, the 
right landing gear attach bracket bolts sheared and the right wing contacted the runway.  The 
airplane then skidded to the right side of the runway and exited the runway tail first. 
Inspection of the airplane revealed the right arm of the tailwheel had failed approximately 1' 
from the center of the arm.  Corrosion was present on the factured surface. 
the failure of the tailwheel assembly due to corrosion.  A factor associated with the accident 
was the overload failure of the right main landing gear. 
 On July 1, 1998, at 1330 central daylight time, an American Yankee AA1-1TW, N5643L, 
impacted the terrain following a loss of directional control during a landing roll on runway 29 
(3,539' x 100') at the Clark Airport, Point Lookout, Missouri.  The ATP pilot and passenger 
were not injured and the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The airplane was being 
operated as a personal flight under 14 CFR part 91 when the accident occurred.  The flight 
originated Cape Girardeau, Missouri, at 1145.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and 
no flight plan was filed.
The pilot stated that during the landing roll, following a 3-point landing, the tailwheel began to 
vibrate.  He reported the vibration increased and the airplane made a "sharp yaw to the left."  
After about 30 degrees of turn, the right landing gear attach bracket bolts sheared and the right 
wing contacted the runway.  The airplane then skidded to the right side of the runway and 
exited the runway tail first.
Inspection of the runway by the Clark Airport Operations Supervisor revealed tail wheel skid 
marks were present on the runway for a length in excess of 150 yards.  
Inspection of the airplane by an Inspector from the Kansas City Federal Aviation 
Administration Flight Standards District Office revealed the right arm of the tailwheel had 
failed approximately 1" from the center of the arm.  Corrosion was present on the factured 
surface.
