The pilot stated that he couldn't find anyone to assist him in hand starting the aircraft, so he 
decided to proceed by himself.  The pilot stated that he could not get the engine to start after 
many attempts.  The pilot adjusted the throttle, increasing it, and again attempted to hand 
start the engine.  The pilot stated that the engine started, ran rough for the first couple of 
rotations, and then the rpms began to increase rapidly.  The aircraft began to pivot around the 
left main gear and the pilot was unable to access the cockpit to retard the throttle.  The aircraft 
continued to turn to the left, departed the tarmac onto a grass area, until the right wing 
impacted a utility pole and guy wire.  Post accident investigation revealed that the pilot had not 
had flown in over six years and had not had a Biennial Flight Review in over 72 months.  It was 
also revealed that the hand brake only engages the left brake on the aircraft, which caused the 
aircraft to rotate about the left main gear. 
the improper use of the engine starting procedure.  Factors contributing to the accident were 
the pilot in command's lack of recent experience, the aircraft not being tied down, the utility 
pole and guy wire. 
 On July 1, 1998, at 1518 central daylight time, a Luscombe 8A, N71306, operated by a private 
pilot, received substantial damage when it impacted a utility pole and support wires after a 
hand start, at the Chillicothe Municipal Airport, near Chillicothe, Missouri.  After the engine 
had started the aircraft began to move, without a pilot aboard, across the ramp until it 
impacted the utility pole and stopped.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
of the accident.  The pilot reported no injuries.  The purposed personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight 
had no flight plan on file.  The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot's written statement, he had just purchased the aircraft near Chicago, 
Illinois, and was re-positioning the aircraft back near his residence. At a scheduled fuel stop, 
the pilot stated that he had asked for assistance, from the airport operator, in hand starting the 
aircraft.  The pilot stated that the airport operator was busy at the time and that he decided to 
hand start the aircraft by himself.  The pilot stated that he set the hand brake, checked the 
throttle position, and began to hand start the aircraft.  The pilot stated that he could not get the 
engine to start after many attempts.  The pilot adjusted the throttle, increasing it, and again 
attempted to hand start the engine.  The pilot stated that engine started, ran rough for the first 
couple of rotations, and then the rpms began to increase rapidly.  The aircraft began to pivot 
around the left main gear and the pilot was unable to access the cockpit to retard the throttle.  
The aircraft continued to turn to the left, departed the tarmac onto a grass area, until the right 
wing impacted a utility pole and guy wire.  There was substantial damage to the right wing, 
right main gear, and propeller.
Post accident investigation revealed that the pilot had not had flown in over six years and had 
not had Biennial Flight Review in over 72 months.  It was also revealed that the hand brake 
only engages the left brake on the aircraft, which caused the aircraft to rotate about the left 
main gear.
