The certificated airline transport pilot was practicing touch-and-go landings on runway 17 in a 
tailwheel airplane.  He stated that at the time of the accident, he inadvertently failed to meet 
the pilot-in-command requirements for a tailwheel airplane.  The pilot rated passenger, seated 
in the right seat, was not a certificated flight instructor. The pilot stated that wind conditions at 
the time of the accident were varied, and were last reported to be from 090 degrees at 9 knots.  
The pilot stated that just after touchdown, the airplane veered to the right.  He said that he 
applied left rudder in an attempt to maintain heading, but the airplane continued to the right.  
He stated that upon reaching the edge of the runway, he applied the brakes, and the left wheel 
lost traction in loose gravel.  He said that the right wheel maintained traction, and the airplane 
ground looped to the right.  During the ground loop, the left wing, aileron, and left elevator 
struck the runway and sustained substantial damage.  At 1153, an Aviation Routine Weather 
Report (METAR) was reporting in part: Wind, 159 degrees (magnetic) at 7 knots. 
The pilot's inadequate compensation for crosswind conditions.  Factors associated with the 
accident were a crosswind and the pilot's lack of recent experience in a tailwheel airplane. 
 On July 1, 1998, about 1120 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 185E airplane, 
N4574F, sustained substantial damage while landing at the Iliamna Airport, Iliamna, Alaska.  
The airplane was being operated as a local area, visual flight rules (VFR) flight under Title 14, 
CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airline transport pilot, and the pilot rated 
passenger aboard, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight 
plan was filed.  
During a telephone conversation with a National Transportation Safety Board investigator the 
pilot reported that he was practicing touch-and-go landings in a tailwheel airplane.  He stated 
that at the time of the accident, he inadvertently failed to meet the 90 day pilot-in-command 
currency requirements for a tailwheel airplane.  The pilot rated passenger, seated in the right 
seat, was not a certificated flight instructor.  
In his written statement to the NTSB dated July 14, 1998, the pilot reported that that wind 
conditions at the time of the accident were varied, and were last reported to be from 090 
degrees at 9 knots.  The pilot stated that just after touchdown on runway 17, the airplane 
veered to the right.  He said that he applied left rudder in an attempt to maintain heading, but 
the airplane continued to the right.  He stated that upon reaching the edge of the runway, he 
applied the brakes, and the left wheel lost traction in loose gravel. The right wheel maintained 
traction, and the airplane ground looped to the right.  During the ground loop, the left wing, 
aileron, and left elevator struck the runway and sustained substantial damage.     
The closest official weather observation station is Iliamna. On July 1, 1998, at 1153, an Aviation 
Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting in part: Sky conditions and ceiling, 2,900 
feet overcast; visibility, 10 statute miles; wind, 159 degrees (magnetic) at 7 knots.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
