The certificated commercial pilot was landing on a remote gravel runway.  During a telephone 
conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge, on July 1, 
1998, the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he inadvertently flew further down the 
runway and landed about midfield of the 1,150 feet long runway.  He stated that after 
touchdown he was unable to stop the airplane before it went down an embankment at the end 
of the runway, and nosed over.  In his written statement to the NTSB dated September 1, 1998, 
the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he encountered an unexpected 'wind change' 
from the east.  He said that the tailwind caused the airplane's ground speed to accelerate, and 
after touchdown, he was unable to stop prior to reaching the runway end. The airplane's left 
wing sustained substantial damage. 
The pilot's failure to attain a proper touchdown point during landing.  A factor associated with 
the accident is the presence of a variable wind condition, and the pilot's decision not to 
perform a go-around. 
 On July 1, 1998, about 1545 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna 206G airplane, 
N456TA, sustained substantial damage while landing at the Aleknagik Airstrip, Aleknagik,  
Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) flight under Title 14, 
CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane is registered to, and operated by, Arctic 
Circle Air, Inc.  The certificated commercial pilot, and the one passenger aboard were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed.  The flight 
originated at the Dillingham Airport, Dillingham, Alaska, about 1530.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge, on July 1, 1998, the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he inadvertently 
flew further down the runway and landed about midfield of the 1,150 feet long runway.  He 
stated that after touchdown he was unable to stop the airplane before it went down an 
embankment at the end of the runway, and nosed over. 
In his written statement to the NTSB dated September 1, 1998, the pilot reported that while 
landing to the west, he encountered an unexpected "wind change" from the east.  He said that 
the tailwind caused the airplane's ground speed to accelerate, and after touchdown, he was 
unable to stop prior to reaching the runway end.   
The airplane's left wing sustained substantial damage. 
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
