The airplane suffered a partial loss of engine power.  The pilot conducted a forced landing; 
however, impacted trees and the terrain during the descent.  The pilot told a physician that the 
airplane suffered a loss of about 70% power and later told his attorney that the airplane 
suffered fuel exhaustion.  An examination of the airplane subsequent to the accident revealed 
no mechanical anomalies other than those associated with impact.  Emergency responders and 
Federal Aviation Administration inspectors were on site within two hours of the accident.  They 
did not find any fuel leaking from the airplane and did not smell fuel.  An examination of the 
left fuel tank found only unusable fuel.  The fuel selector was found positioned to the left fuel 
tank. 
the pilots improper preflight planning, which failed to detect the fuel selector positioned on the 
left fuel tank, which had insufficient fuel, resulting in fuel starvation, and the loss of engine 
power. 
 On July 1, 1998, at 1100 central daylight time, a Piper PA22, N5181Z, sustained substantial 
damage during impact with the terrain approximately 5 miles south of Spearfish Airport, 
Spearfish, South Dakota.  The pilot received fatal injuries.  The passenger reported minor 
injuries.  The airplane was being operated as a personal flight under provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91 when the accident occurred..  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no 
flight plan was on file.  The flight originated in Spearfish, South Dakota, about 1030, and was 
en route to Cheyenne, Wyoming 
The passenger was a non-pilot and said that he remembered the airplane being buffeted 
around and descending into the trees.
The pilot survived the accident and succumbed later in the hospital. 
Emergency responders and FAA inspectors were on site within two hours of the accident and 
said that there was no smell of fuel nor did they find any fuel leaking from the wreckage.  The 
left fuel tank was intact and contained only unusable fuel. The fuel selector was found selected 
to the left fuel tank.
An inspection of the airplane subsequent to the accident failed to reveal any mechanical 
anomalies other than those associated with ground impact.  The carburetor had some fuel in it 
and no water was found.  Magnetos produced sparks on all plugs.  A compression check was 
performed on cylinders and all had thumb compression.  The left fuel was filled with water and 
a small leak was noted by the drain plug which was associated with impact damage.
