The pilot reported the airplane swerved and skidded sideways off the runway during the 
landing roll.  The airplane traveled onto a taxiway where it contacted a 3 to 4 inch rise between 
the grass and the pavement.  The right main landing gear collapsed then the rise was 
contacted.  The pilot/builder reported the loss of directional control was a result of an under 
inflated tailwheel.  He reported it should have been inflated to 38 psi due to the extra weight of 
having a passenger on board. 
the pilot's failure to assure the tailwheel tire had adequate pressure which resulted in his 
inability to maintain directional control of the airplane during a landing.  Factors associated 
with the accident were the inadequate pressure and the uneven terrain contacted by the 
landing gear. 
 On July 1, 1998, at 1520 eastern daylight time, a Starduster Too, N159MK, operated by a 
private pilot experienced a right main gear collapse while landing at the Bay City Clements 
Municipal Airport, Bay City, Michigan.  The pilot and passenger were not injured.  The airplane 
was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual 
meteorological conditions.  The flight originated from the Bay City Clements Municipal Airport 
at 1415 eastern daylight time.
The pilot reported that upon landing he lost directional control of the airplane.  He stated the 
airplane swerved on the runway, then skidded sideways off the side of the runway.  The 
airplane then traveled onto a taxiway where it contacted a 3 to 4 inch rise between the grass 
and the pavement.  The right main landing gear collapsed then the rise was contacted.  The 
pilot/builder reported the loss of directional control was a result of an under inflated tailwheel.  
He reported it should have been inflated to 38 psi due to the extra weight of having a passenger 
on board.
Inspection of the airplane by an Inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration Grand 
Rapids, Michigan, Flight Standards District Office revealed the right main landing gear 
separated at the attachment weld.  When the right main gear collapsed the lower right wing 
contacted the terrain.  This resulted in a failure of the right lower wing rear spar.
