According to the pilot, he entered a left downwind for runway 36.  He touched down hard on 
the first landing, and the airplane bounced into the air.  The pilot then pulled back on the 
controls, and the airplane sank, collided with the runway, and bounced a second time.  The 
nose gear collapsed, and the propeller struck the ground on the second bounce. The airplane 
touched down for a third time and veered off the left side of the runway. According to the FAA, 
the airplane had wing damage and cracked engine mounts.  The inspector stated the airplane 
made too steep of an approach which led him to begin bouncing down the runway.  The pilot 
had 37 hours of total flying time. 
The pilot's improper flare that resulted in a hard landing and porpoise, and his improper 
recovery from the bounced landing. 
 On July 1, 1998, at 1130 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-161, N4331M, executed a 
hard landing at Homestead General Aviation Airport, Homestead, Florida.  The solo, 
instructional flight was operated by the student pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 
91 and visual flight rules.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident.  There was no flight plan filed.  The airplane was substantially damaged, and the pilot 
was not injured.  The flight departed Kendall-Tamiami Airport, Miami, Florida at 1115.
According to the pilot, he entered a left downwind for runway 36.  He touched down 
hard on the first landing, and the airplane bounced into the air.  The pilot then pulled back on 
the controls, and the airplane sank, collided with the runway, and bounced a second time.  The 
nose gear collapsed, and the propeller struck the ground on the second bounce.  The airplane 
touched down for a third time and veered off the left side of the runway.
According to the FAA, the airplane has wing damage and cracked engine mounts.  The 
inspector stated the airplane made too steep of an approach which led him to begin bouncing 
down the runway.  He also stated the pilot had only 37 hours of total time.
