Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
KENAI, AK
Accident Number:
ANC03LA025
Date & Time:
02/01/2003, 1400 AST 
Registration:
N704JB
Aircraft:
Cessna 150
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private certificated pilot reported that he made a precautionary landing at a private airport 
on a 4,500 foot, gravel surfaced runway that was oriented north/south.  He said he overflew 
the airport and saw another airplane parked on the north end of the runway.  He said he 
decided to land toward the south, beyond the parked airplane.  The pilot said a tailwind was 
blowing from the north about 6 knots.  The pilot was familiar with the airport and knew the 
runway ran slightly uphill toward the south.  He said that he did not think the downwind 
landing would be a problem, and touched down just beyond the half-way point on the runway 
and allowed the airplane to coast.  As the airplane neared the end of the runway, he applied the 
airplane's brakes.  The pilot said he then realized the runway surface was glazed with ice, and 
the airplane began to slide sideways.  The left main landing gear collided with a snow berm at 
the south end of the runway, and the left wing struck the snow.  The pilot indicated the 
accident could have been prevented by "attempt to use brakes immediately after touchdown 
(landing) to get a good idea of surface conditions."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's delayed application of the airplane brakes resulting in an overrun during the 
landing roll, and subsequent collision with a snowbank.  A contributing factor in the accident 
was icy runway conditions.
Page 2 of 6ANC03LA025
Findings
Occurrence #1: OVERRUN
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ICY
3. (C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK
Page 3 of 6ANC03LA025
Factual Information
On February 1, 2003, about 1400 Alaska standard time, a tailwheel-equipped Cessna 150 
airplane, N704JB, sustained substantial damage when it overran the runway, and collided with 
a snow berm at the Trading Bay Airport, a private airport located about 21 miles north-
northwest of Kenai, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local 
area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was 
operated by the pilot.  The private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The flight originated at Johnson's Airstrip, Kenai, 
about 1130.  No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on February 1, the pilot reported that he was planning to land at 
the Trading Bay Airport.  He said he overflew the airport and saw another airplane parked on 
the north end of the runway.  The runway is oriented north/south, and is about 4,500 feet long.  
The pilot said he observed what he thought was a coating of gravel on the runway.  The pilot 
reported that he decided to land toward the south, beyond the parked airplane.  The pilot said a 
tailwind was blowing from the north about 6 knots.  He touched down just beyond the half-way 
point on the runway and allowed the airplane to coast.  As the airplane neared the end of the 
runway, he applied the airplane's brakes.  The pilot said he then realized the runway surface 
was glazed with ice, and the airplane began to slide sideways.  The left main landing gear 
collided with a snow berm at the south end of the runway, and the left wing struck the snow.  
After the collision, the pilot said his inspection indicated the left main landing gear strut was 
loose at its fuselage attach point.  On February 5, the pilot confirmed the airplane's left main 
landing gear attach point received structural damage, and the upper surface of the left wingtip 
was slightly wrinkled.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, he 
indicated that his reason for landing at the Trading Bay Airport was a precaution to inspect the 
airplane following a 200 rpm loss of engine power.  He indicated that he was familiar with the 
airport and knew the runway ran slightly uphill toward the south.  He said that he did not think 
the downwind landing would be a problem.  In the optional, "Operator/Owner Safety 
Recommendation", portion of the NTSB Form 6120.1, the pilot indicated the accident could 
have been prevented by "attempt to use brakes immediately after touchdown (landing) to get a 
good idea of surface conditions."
Page 4 of 6ANC03LA025
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/05/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/15/2001
Flight Time:
1053 hours (Total, all aircraft), 211 hours (Total, this make and model), 978 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 33 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N704JB
Model/Series:
150 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15078638
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/13/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
160 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1925 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-E2D
Registered Owner:
CHRISTOPHER G. COPPLE
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
CHRISTOPHER G. COPPLE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ANC03LA025
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5500 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 8000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
KENAI, AK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
KENAI, AK 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
TRADING BAY AIRPORT 
Runway Surface Type:
Gravel
Airport Elevation:
70 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Ice
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4500 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
60.808333, -151.700000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
07/23/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
JACK SEYMOUR; FAA-AL-ANC FSDO 03; ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC03LA025
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
