National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ELKTON, MD
Accident Number: NYC97LA102
Date & Time: 06/01/1997, 1600 EDT
Registration: N22935
Aircraft: Cessna 150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot departed on a local flight.
While over flying his farm, he decided to land on the farm's 1,600 foot grass strip.
The pilot stated the wind sock was pointing straight down the runway and he executed a soft field landing.
Immediately after the main gear touched down, the airplane began to veer right.
The right wing struck trees, and bent upward.
The airplane spun around 180 degrees, and was thrown backward.
The left wing also impacted trees.
The pilot reported that the right brake had grabbed after landing, which caused the airplane to veer into the trees.
Examination of the aircraft on site, could not confirm that the right brake had grabbed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control, which resulted in the airplane veering right, and striking trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On June 1, 1997, about 1600 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150, N22935, was substantially damaged during landing to a  private grass strip in Elkton, Maryland.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he departed on a local flight from Summit Airport, Middletown, Delaware.
While over flying his farm, he decided to land on the farm's 1,600 foot grass strip.
The pilot stated the wind sock was pointing straight down the runway, and he executed a soft field landing with the stall warning horn being heard intermittently.
Immediately after the main gear touched down, the airplane began to veer right.
The right wing struck trees, and bent upward.
The airplane spun around 180 degrees, and was thrown backward.
The left wing also impacted  trees.
The pilot reported that the right brake had grabbed after landing, which caused the airplane to veer into the trees.
Examination of the brake system by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector could not confirm that the right brake had grabbed.
It was noted that 72.2 hours had elapsed since the brake discs had been replaced with new discs on October 1, 1995.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 81, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
