National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOLLYWOOD, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA177
Date & Time: 06/01/1997, 1256 EDT
Registration: N7393C
Aircraft: Cessna T-210-N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that while on downwind for landing, he lowered the flaps to 10 degrees and extended the landing gear.
As he turned on base leg, he noticed the radios were not working and the electrical system ammeter was showing the system was not charging.
On final approach, he noticed the landing gear extended light was very dim, and there was no change when he pushed it for test.
During the landing rollout, the left main landing gear collapsed.
Postcrash examination showed the battery was discharged, there was corrosion on all of the landing gear components, and the gear warning horn was operating intermittently.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to ensure the landing gear was locked down before landing, following an electrical system failure, resulting in the left main landing gear collapsing during landing rollout.
The electrical malfunction and resultant discharged battery were related factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - DOWNWIND Findings 1.
(F) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM - MALFUNCTION 2.
(F) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,BATTERY - DISCHARGED ---------- Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(C) GEAR DOWN AND LOCKED - NOT VERIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The commercial-rated pilot and airline transport-rated passenger reported no injuries.
The flight had last departed from Hollywood, Florida, the same day, about 1250.
The pilot stated that while on the downwind leg for landing on runway 18 left, he lowered the flaps to 10 degrees and extended the landing gear.
As he turned on base leg he noticed the radios were not working and the electrical system amp meter was showing the system was not charging.
He used a hand held radio to communicate with the control tower and extended his downwind leg.
He complied with the low voltage emergency procedures.
As he turned final he checked the landing gear green light.
It appeared dim and when he tested it, it did not change.
He then called for a visual inspection of the landing gear.
Landing and rollout were normal until the aircraft slowed to about 15 knots.
While applying brakes the left main landing gear collapsed.
Postaccident testing of the aircraft's landing gear system was performed by an FAA inspector.
A fully charged battery was installed in the aircraft and the aircraft was placed on jacks.
The left main landing gear uplock was found to have paint scrapped off the inboard side.
The landing gear appeared to be out of rig.
Corrosion was present on all components of the landing gear.
The landing gear was retracted and left main landing gear hung momentarily before locking on the uplock.
The landing gear extension was normal.
The landing gear warning horn was found to operate intermittently.
(See FAA inspector statement).
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 40, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
