Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
BIRMINGHAM, AL
Incident Number:
ATL01IA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2000, 1618 CDT 
Registration:
N69826
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas MD-80
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 146 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
During cruise flight, at flight level 310, an MD-80, operated by Continental Airlines 
experienced an electrical fire.  An emergency was declared and the flight was diverted into 
Birmingham, Alabama, and landed without further incident.  The examination of the airplane 
disclosed a 2 by 1 1/2 inch fire-damaged hole in the left jump seat wall.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
THE FAILURE OF MAINTENACE PERSONNEL TO FOLLOW FLEET CAMPAIGN 
DIRECTIVE ON HOW TO INSTALL A CERTIFICATE HOLDER.
Findings
Occurrence #1: FIRE
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM - FIRE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE - IMPROPER USE OF - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
Page 2 of 5ATL01IA001
Factual Information
 On October 1, 2000, central daylight time, a McDonnell Douglas MD-80, N69826, operated by 
Continental Airlines as Flight 1579, experienced an electrical fire during cruise flight at flight 
level 310 near Birmingham, Alabama.  Flight 1579 was operated under the provisions of Title 
14 CFR Part 121 as a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Atlanta, Georgia, to Houston, 
Texas.  The flight departed Hartsfield International Airport in Atlanta, Georgia, at 
approximately 1720 eastern daylight time with two air transport pilots, one jump-seat rider, 
three flight attendants, and 141 passengers on board.  The airplane sustained minor damage 
and the jump-seat rider received minor injuries; there were no other injuries reported.  Visual 
weather conditions prevailed at the time of the incident, and Flight 1579 operated on an 
instrument flight rules flight plan.
According to the pilot, approximately 15 minutes into the flight, the cockpit filled with smoke 
and he heard a loud popping sound and saw sparks emitting from the jump seat area.  The 
jump seat rider reported that he heard an explosion and leaned forward to avoid heat, which he 
felt on his left shoulder.  When the jump seat rider looked at his left shoulder, he noticed that 
his shirt was burning.  He extinguished the fire on his shirt, and put on his oxygen mask, since 
the cockpit was filled with smoke.  The pilot declared and emergency and initiated a 
descending right turn.  The flight diverted into Birmingham, Alabama, and landed without 
further incident.
According to the Continental Fleet Campaign Directive, (FCD), the registration certificate 
holder was modified on September 28, 2000.  The FCD called for the holder to be modified in 
order to prevent loss of the certificate or damage of the certificate that would preclude dispatch 
of the airplane.  The FCD required maintenance personnel to drill two small pilot holes just 
above the top of the certificate, and, in the case of mounting on a metal wall, install two screws 
into the pilot holes.  A note is included on the FDC that allows alternate length screws to be 
used as required.
The examination of the airplane disclosed a 2 by 1 1/2 inch fire-damaged hole in the left jump 
seat wall.  Several heavy gauge electrical wires were welded together on the opposite side of the 
wall.  There were also four 50-amphere circuit breakers popped on the left circuit breaker 
panel behind the pilot's seat.  The hole also included an area of the left edge of the registration 
certificate holder.  The plastic cover of the registration certificate holder was melted in this area 
and soot damage was evident for several inches around the hole.  The registration certificate 
holder was attached to the wall by 8 screws that extended into the cavity where the electrical 
fire occurred.  The hole appeared to be on the left side, middle position of the certificate holder.  
This screw was missing; all of the seven other screws were present.  The screws immediately 
above and below this middle position on the left side extended is approximately 0.5 inches into 
the cavity where the electrical fire occurred.  The missing segments of wire were aligned with 
the center of the hole in the wall, and also with the position of the middle screw.  At the point of 
the missing wire segments, a screw similar to that placed above and below the missing middle 
screw could have extended into the wiring.  There is no mention in the FCD of steps that 
should be taken to insure that no damage is done to items on the other side of the wall either 
during the drilling process or by the screws themselves once they are inserted into the holes.
Corrective actions that Continental Airlines have taken are to remove all certificate holders that 
are on the EPC wall and to install a new 3-slot certificate holder on the galley wall, which has a 
Page 3 of 5ATL01IA001
honeycomb backing. According to the Engineering Authorization, the best location for the 
certificate holder approximately 32.5 inches from the floor, 3 inches below the lowest coat 
hook, and 4.5 inches in from the cockpit door.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/03/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas
Registration:
N69826
Model/Series:
MD-80 MD-80
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
MD-80-82
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
172
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/06/2000, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
149500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
39417 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
JT8D
Registered Owner:
FIRST SECURITY BANK NA 
TRUSTEE
Rated Power:
7700 hp
Operator:
CONTINENTAL AIRLINES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
CO
Page 4 of 5ATL01IA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BHM, 644 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 20000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
ATLANTA, GA (ATL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
HOUSTON, TX (IAH)
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
BIRMINGHAM AIRPORT (BHM)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
644 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 5 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
141 None
Aircraft Fire:
In-Flight
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 146 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
PHILLIP      POWELL
Adopted Date:
07/17/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
RONALD P BLITZ
SCOTT   WARREN; WASHINGTON, DC,
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5ATL01IA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
