Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
DELHI, CA
Accident Number:
LAX99LA293
Date & Time:
09/01/1999, 0615 PDT 
Registration:
N59551
Aircraft:
Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The pilot reported that the engine rpm began decreasing during the takeoff climb, about 200 to 
300 feet agl, while he was over a grove of trees.  He extended his autorotative glide to make it 
past the trees, which resulted in a further decrease of main rotor rpm.  The helicopter landed 
hard, about 20 to 30 miles per hour of forward velocity, and rolled over.  Postcrash 
examination by a FAA inspector revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunction; however, the 
fluid found in the airframe fuel filter and mechanical fuel pump screen was noted to be about 
90 percent water.  About 30 percent of the fluid found in the Ceco fuel system screen was also 
water.  The FAA inspector reported that the fuel cap was loose in the opening and did not 
appear to seal properly; the shaft seal was worn in the cap and the cap locking mechanism was 
not adjusted properly.  When the fuel cap was removed, the inspector noted that the bottom of 
the fuel filler opening was deformed from the fuel nozzles being inserted in the opening.  The 
pilot reported that he had washed the helicopter the night before the accident.  He further 
reported that during the preflight he had drained fuel from the airframe fuel filter and fuel 
sump and hadn't noted any water or contaminants. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to the pilot's inadequate preflight, which failed to detect water 
contamination of the fuel system.  The operator's inadequate maintenance of the loose fitting 
fuel cap and the deformed filler opening, which allowed water to leak into the fuel tank, were 
also causal.  A factor in the accident was the trees along the autorotative flight path, which 
required the pilot to stretch the glide and resulted in a low main rotor rpm situation for the 
landing flare. 
Page 2 of 6LAX99LA293
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,CAP - LEAK
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,REPLACEMENT - INADEQUATE - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. (C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER
4. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
5. (F) OBJECT - TREE(S)
6. (F) PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. (F) ROTOR RPM - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: ROLL OVER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Page 3 of 6LAX99LA293
Factual Information
 On September 1, 1999, at 0615 hours Pacific daylight time, a Bell 206B, N59551, lost engine 
power about 1/2-mile after takeoff and force landed in a field in Delhi, California.  The 
helicopter, operated by Bettencourt Flying Service, Inc., Delhi, was substantially damaged 
during the hard landing.  The commercial pilot was not injured.  The local aerial application 
flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137 and originated from a private 
airstrip at 0605.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  
The pilot reported that the night before the accident, he washed the helicopter and then stored 
it for the night.  He stated that on the morning of the accident, he completed the preflight 
inspection, during which he drained fuel from the airframe fuel filter and the fuel sump.  He 
reported that he didn't note any water or contaminants in the fuel.  The pilot stated that he 
started the engine and, after 5 minutes of warm-up, he lifted off and performed a pass down 
the runway before departing to the southeast.  He reported that he was still in the initial takeoff 
climb, about 200 to 300 feet agl and about 1/3-mile off the end of the runway, when he heard 
the engine begin to unspool.  He checked the rotor and engine tachometer and noticed that the 
rpm was decreasing.  The pilot stated that the throttle was fully opened and he verified that the 
fuel valve was open.  He was over a grove of almond trees as he began an emergency descent.  
He reported that he had to alter the angle of descent to make it past the trees, which resulted in 
further decrease of main rotor rpm.  The pilot stated that the low rpm warning horn was 
sounding as he impacted the ground.  He estimated that his speed on impact was 
approximately 20 to 30 miles per hour.  The landing gear collapsed and the main rotor blades 
severed the tail boom.  The helicopter came to rest on its left side.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Fresno Flight Standards District Office 
responded to the accident site and examined the aircraft and powerplant.  He stated that the 
throttle and governor linkage appeared to function normally.  He inspected the turbine wheel 
through the exhaust stack and noted no abnormalities.  The engine rotated freely.
The inspector removed the airframe fuel filter and noted that approximately 90 percent of the 
fluid in the filter was water.  Further, approximately 90 percent of the fluid found in the 
mechanical fuel pump screen and about 30 percent of the fluid from the Ceco fuel system 
screen was also water.  He reported that the fuel cap did not appear to seal properly; the cap 
could be moved in the opening even when locked.  He stated that it appeared that the shaft seal 
was worn in the cap and the cap locking mechanism was not adjusted properly.  When the fuel 
cap was removed, the inspector noted that the bottom of the fuel tank opening was deformed in 
a dimensional shape that corresponded to the fuel nozzles used by the operator to refuel the 
helicopter.
Page 4 of 6LAX99LA293
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/18/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
10000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model), 9888 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N59551
Model/Series:
206B 206B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
1392
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/04/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
89 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
10263 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20
Registered Owner:
BETTENCOURT FLYING 
SERVICE INC
Rated Power:
400 hp
Operator:
BETTENCOURT FLYING 
SERVICE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
PWFG
Page 5 of 6LAX99LA293
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MCE, 156 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
16 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0553 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
120°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 10000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0605 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
NOELANI      MARS
Adopted Date:
05/09/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
RICK   ROBINETTE; FRESNO, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX99LA293
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
