The pilot reported that he and another pilot had conducted a series of touch-and-go landings. 
He added that, after takeoff for the accident touch-and-go landing and during the base-to-final 
turn in the airport traffic pattern, the airplane™s bank angle was too steep, its nose attitude was 
too high, and its airspeed was low. The airplane then entered a stall/spin. The pilot was able to 
recover to a wings-level, nose-low attitude before the airplane impacted the ground short of the 
runway. The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would 
have precluded normal operation.
The pilot™s failure to maintain adequate airspeed, which led to the airplane exceeding its critical 
angle-of-attack and experiencing a stall/spin.
On September 1, 2014, about 0830 mountain daylight time, an amateur-built RV-6A airplane 
was substantially damaged when it impacted the ground following a loss of control during a 
landing approach to runway 8 at the Las Cruces International Airport, Las Cruces, New 
Mexico. The pilot received serious injuries and the pilot rated passenger received minor 
injuries. The airplane received substantial damage to both wings and the fuselage. The aircraft 
was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
flight, which was not operated on a flight plan. The local flight originated about 0730. 
The pilot reported that he and another pilot had performed a series of touch and go landings 
using runway 26. They then continued making touch and go landings using the other runways 
at the airport. The last takeoff prior to the accident was made from runway 22. They then 
entered a left downwind for runway 8, and then turned from the downwind to the base leg. The 
pilot stated that the base to final turn started to get steep as to not "overrun the runway" and 
the nose attitude was slightly high. When the airplane was about halfway through the base to 
final turn, the pilot felt that the airplane was slow and they needed to get the nose down. About 
that time he felt the pre-stall "burble" and he immediately knew that the airplane bank was too 
steep and the airspeed was too slow. He immediately pushed forward on the controls as the 
stall/spin began. He was able to recovery to a wings level, nose low attitude before the airplane 
impacted the ground short of the runway. In his report he stated that there were no mechanical 
malfunctions of the airplane.
