The pilot stated that, about 45 minutes before departure, he obtained the current weather 
conditions via an internet website and observed a thunderstorm located about 100 miles west 
of the departure airport. About 20 minutes into the local area flight, he recalled seeing a low 
cloud bank, with a base of about 1,000 feet above ground level (agl), about 1/4 mile east of the 
airport. At the same time, he noticed an area of heavy rain from clouds located about 15 miles 
west of his position. He decided to land as soon as possible due to the deteriorating weather. 
Instead of making an approach to the airport's single runway, he decided to land toward the 
west in an open pasture area that was located on the airport property. Shortly after clearing 
trees and hangars that were located on the east side of the airport, the weight-shift-control 
aircraft suddenly lost altitude, from about 20 feet agl, and impacted the ground in an upright 
attitude. After the impact, the aircraft rolled over onto its left side. The pilot reported that the 
aircraft did not appear to have any forward velocity when it impacted terrain, as indicated by a 
lack of damage to the surrounding vegetation. The aircraft sustained substantial damage to the 
wing and fuselage. He stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions of the aircraft that 
would have precluded normal operation. Additionally, he reported that the aircraft's operating 
limitations included a maximum headwind and crosswind component of 21 knots and 11 knots, 
respectively.
Meteorological data collected during the accident investigation indicated that, at the time of 
the accident, there was a squall line of strong-to-severe thunderstorms within a few miles of 
the accident site. Local weather stations indicated that there was a wind shift from the south to 
the north that was associated with the passage of the frontal boundary. The weather stations 
also reported wind gusts reaching 24 knots. A review of weather radar imagery indicated that, 
at the time of the pilot's preflight weather check, there was a line of thunderstorms located 
about 40 miles northwest of the departure airport. The same line of thunderstorms was within 
a few miles of the airport at the time of the accident and moved through the area almost 
immediately thereafter. The meteorological data suggested that the aircraft likely encountered 
a gust front that was associated with approaching line of thunderstorms. Although the pilot 
checked the weather before departure, his failure to correctly identify the location and speed of 
the approaching line of thunderstorms contributed to the low-level wind shear encounter 
Page 2 of 5CEN14CA532
shortly before touchdown.
The pilot's loss of control after the weight-shift-control aircraft encountered low-level wind 
shear shortly before touchdown. Also causal to the accident was the pilot's inadequate preflight 
weather assessment that failed to correctly determine the actual location and speed of the 
approaching line of thunderstorms.
