Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Gulf Of Mexico, GM
Incident Number:
CEN12IA096
Date & Time:
12/01/2011, 1005 CST 
Registration:
N435PH
Aircraft:
BELL HELICOPTER TEXTRON 
CANADA 407
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
While maneuvering for a precautionary landing to an oil rig platform because of a chip light 
indication, the helicopter's engine lost power. The pilot entered an autorotation, called mayday, 
inflated the helicopter™s floats, and performed a successful water landing. The pilot and 
passenger were able to exit the helicopter unassisted into a life raft and were picked up within 
10 minutes. Examination and disassembly of the engine revealed the No. 2 bearing had failed. 
Metallurgical examination of the bearing showed the No. 2 bearing outer ring cracked in 
fatigue due to false brinnelling, which occurs in cases where the bearing is stationary but is 
subjected to ambient vibration or shock during transport. A spalling area was severe enough to 
propagate mechanical stress in the outer ring causing the ring to fracture. The engine 
compressor section was overhauled 2.7 hours before the failure.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The failure of the compressor section No. 2 bearing due to false brinnelling and fatigue.
Findings
Aircraft
Compressor section - Failure (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN12IA096
Factual Information
On December 1, 2011, about 1005 central standard time, a Bell 407 helicopter, N435PH, was 
successfully autorotated to the water following a loss of engine power while maneuvering near 
a platform in the Gulf of Mexico. The helicopter was not damaged during the on water landing. 
The commercial pilot, and sole passenger, were not injured. The helicopter was registered to 
and operated by PHI, Inc., under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 as a 
non-scheduled air-taxi flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a company flight 
plan had been filed. The flight originated from platform EC278-C, and was en route to platform 
EC261, both in the Gulf Of Mexico.
According to the pilot, while en route to EC261 the engine chip light illuminated. The flight was 
abeam platform EC278-B at the time, and the pilot elected to divert for a precautionary 
landing. While on the base leg to EC278-B, the pilot heard a loud whining noise, followed by a 
loud popping noise, and the helicopter began to yaw. The pilot entered an autorotation, called 
mayday, inflated the floats, and performed a successful water landing. The pilot and passenger 
were able to exit the helicopter unassisted into a life raft and were picked up within 10 minutes. 
The helicopter remained upright for approximately 20 minutes before overturning.
The engine was removed from the helicopter and examined at the PHI facility in Lafayette, 
Louisiana, under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector. Examination 
and disassembly of the engine revealed the No. 2 bearing was fractured. The bearing 
components were located throughout the engine and retained for metallurgical examination.
According to the operator's maintenance records, the Rolls-Royce Model 250-C74B gas turbine 
engine, serial number CAE 847428, underwent a 150/300 hour inspection, and an overhaul to 
the compressor section, at a total time of 7,475.6 hours. The engine was installed on the 
helicopter 2.7 hours prior to the accident.
Metallurgical examination of the bearing and other components was completed by Rolls-Royce 
Corporation, Indianapolis, Indiana. According to Rolls-Royce, the No. 2 bearing outer ring 
cracked in fatigue, initiating from a spalled area on the raceway surface. The microstructure, 
hardness, and chemistry of the outer ring conformed to the engineering drawing requirements. 
The damage associated with the other compressor and turbine components examined was 
consistent with damage that would occur after the No. 2 bearing failure.
The failed bearing was then sent to FAG Aerospace, Inc, Stratford, Ontario, Canada, for 
evaluation. Results of the evaluation showed the failure occurred due to false brinnelling, 
where the bearing is stationary, but subjected to ambient vibration or shock during transport. 
The bearing balls were free to vibrate within the bearing. During the vibration period, the 
bearing experienced relative microscopic motion. The spacing between each set of brinnelling 
marks was equal to the ball spacing within the bearing. False brinnelling increased sufficient 
load during bearing operation which caused premature spalling. One spalling area was severe 
enough to propagate mechanical stress in the outer ring causing the ring to fracture.
History of Flight
Enroute
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Page 3 of 5CEN12IA096
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/15/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/27/2011
Flight Time:
3848 hours (Total, all aircraft), 849 hours (Total, this make and model), 3834 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 238 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 52 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL HELICOPTER TEXTRON 
CANADA
Registration:
N435PH
Model/Series:
407 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53891
Landing Gear Type: 
Emergency Float; High Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/29/2011, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
2.7 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4769 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
ROLLS-ROYC
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-C47B
Registered Owner:
PHI INC
Rated Power:
813 hp
Operator:
PHI INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Page 4 of 5CEN12IA096
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.22 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
EC-278C, GM 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
EC-261, GM 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1035 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
28.424722, -92.875000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy LeBaron
Adopted Date:
04/10/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Jason B Adame; Federal Aviation Administration; Baton Rouge, LA
Mike Weber; Rolls Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Tom Yakubovich; PHI, Inc.; Lafayette, LA
Publish Date:
04/10/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82447
Page 5 of 5CEN12IA096
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
