The pilot-in-command (PIC) stated that they were flying at 4,000 feet msl over Lake 
Pontchartrain when the flight crew heard a bang.  The pilots thought that they had experienced 
a bird strike, and they landed uneventfully at New Orleans.  Post flight examination of the left 
wing revealed that the left wing's fuel vent was blocked with duct tape, and the wet wing fuel 
tank had collapsed.  The fuel tank stringers and the wing ribs sustained structural damage.  
The PIC stated that the fuel tanks had been repaired and pressure tested prior to the flight.  
The PIC added that after the pressure test, the mechanic, who repaired the fuel tank, removed 
the tape from the right wing's fuel vent; however, both the mechanic and the flight crew failed 
to notice the duct tape over the left wing's fuel vent.  The flight crew stated that there were no 
streamers or markers present to indicate that the fuel tank vent was covered with duct tape.
the pilot-in-command's inadequate preflight inspection, which resulted in a flight with a 
blocked fuel tank vent.  A contributing factor was maintenance personnel's failure to remove 
the tape covering the fuel tank vent following a pressure test.
On February 03, 2001, at 0910 central standard time, a British Aerospace HS.125-700A 
turbojet airplane, N190WC, was substantially damaged when its left wing fuel tank compressed 
and the left wing distorted during a normal descent into New Orleans, Louisiana.  The airplane 
was registered to and operated by Walker Aviation, Inc., of Jackson, Mississippi.  The airline 
transport pilot-in-command (PIC), the airline transport second-in-command (SIC), and the 
jump seat passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
business flight.  The flight originated from Jackson, Mississippi, at 0830, and was destined for 
New Orleans.   
During a telephone interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the PIC stated 
that they were flying at 4,000 feet msl over Lake Pontchartrain, Louisiana,  when the flight 
crew heard a bang.  The pilots thought that they had experienced a bird strike, and they landed 
the airplane uneventfully at New Orleans Lakefront Airport.  
Post flight examination of the left wing revealed that the left wing's fuel vent was blocked with 
duct tape, and the wet wing fuel tank had collapsed.  The PIC stated that the fuel tanks had 
been repaired and pressure tested prior to the flight.  The PIC added that after the pressure 
test, the mechanic, who repaired the fuel tank, removed the tape from the right wing's fuel 
vent; however, both the mechanic and the flight crew failed to notice the duct tape over the left 
wing's fuel vent.  The flight crew stated that there were no streamers or markers present to 
indicate that the fuel tank vent was covered with duct tape.
According to one of the FAA inspectors, who examined the airplane, the fuel tank stringers and 
the wing's ribs sustained structural damage.
