This was the first test flight for this experimental airplane. As the airplane  climbed through 
2000 feet and accelerated to approximately 135 knots, the pilot reported that the left winglet 
began to flutter. When left rudder was applied, the flutter condition lessen, but when right 
rudder was applied the  flutter  became more severe.  The pilot attempted an emergency 
landing in a field near the departure airport. Upon touchdown, the aircraft  nosed over and 
came to rest inverted. Examination of the airplane disclosed errors in  composite construction 
in the left and right wings, along with errors in bonding techniques for metal to fiber structures 
were revealed in the design of the aircraft.
The manufacturer's inadequate design of the winglet/rudder assembly, and inadequate 
bonding techniques for metal to fiber structures, which  resulted in control surface flutter.
On February 03, 2001, at 1400 eastern standard time, a Robert Wood, Velocity XLFG, 
N658SE, an experimental airplane, collided with the ground during an emergency landing near 
Sebastian, Florida. The personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 
14 CFR part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. The experimental airplane received substantial damage, and the commercial pilot 
received minor injuries. The flight originated from Sebastian, Florida,  at about 1330.
According to the pilot, this was the first test flight of this experimental airplane. The pilot 
stated that after climbing to approximately 2000 feet and accelerating to approximately 135 
knots, the left winglet began to flutter. The pilot reduced power to slow down, and applied left 
rudder pressure. The left rudder stopped fluttering, but then the right rudder began a severe 
flutter. The pilot applied right rudder pressure, but obtained no response. The aircraft then 
began an uncommanded right turn. The pilot began a descent and attempted an emergency 
landing in a field near the departure airport. Upon touchdown, the aircraft nosed over and 
came to rest inverted.
Examination of the airplane revealed that winglets, and attached rudders, had been installed. 
Reportedly, winglet rudders operate independent of each other and only moves outward to 
create drag, which yaws the airplane. The trailing edge of the left and right rudder is designed 
with a slight out ward bend, thus allowing the relative wind to apply pressure in the opposite  
direction of the normal movement of the rudder. Such pressure forces the rudder against its 
stop, or maintains pressure against the rudder cable during application of rudder control input, 
and, therefore prevents flutter. The trailing edge of the left and right rudders installed  on the 
accident airplane were manufactured with a slightly inward bend, which allowed the relative 
wind to apply pressure in the direction of the normal movement of the rudder.  The 
examination also disclosed that the right rudder cable attachment arm was ripped out of the 
right rudder attach point during flight due to excessive loads imposed by flutter. The 
examination also revealed that the composite material construction in the left and right wings, 
and bonding techniques for metal to fiber structures, were not completed in accordance with 
normal procedures.
