National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: INDIANOLA, MS
Accident Number: ATL97LA070
Date & Time: 05/01/1997, 1500 CDT
Registration: N1710E
Aircraft: EUGENE CLEMENTS PULSAR
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, it was his first flight in this homebuilt airplane.
After taking off, he stated there was a 'heaviness' in the left wing that caused him to turn left.
After trying to correct it, he returned to the departure airport.
He stated he landed fast to combat the left turning tendency, and after touchdown, veered off the side of the runway.
The pilot stated he had no flight hours in the last 90 days.
Witnesses state that after a fast approach, the airplane bounced three times on the runway.
On the last bounce, the airplane landed on the nose gear.
The nose gear collapsed, and the airplane veered off the side of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to correctly recover from a bounced landing leading to the collapse of the nose gear.
Factors were the pilot's lack of recent flight time and lack of aircraft familiarity.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LACK OF FAMILIARITY WITH AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 1, 1997, about 1500 central daylight time, a Eugene Clements Pulsar, N1710E, experienced a nose gear collapse during landing on runway 35 at the Indianola Municipal Airport, Indianola, Mississippi.
The airplane was operated by the owner/builder/pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
A flight plan was not filed for the personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries, and the homebuilt airplane was substantially damaged.
The flight originated at 1455.
This was the maiden flight for the airplane.
The pilot reported that he previously had several hours of taxi time on the airplane.
The pilot reported that the airplane was left wing heavy on takeoff.
After climbing to 2,500 feet, it was clear to the pilot that the condition was not improving, so he returned to land.
The pilot decided to maintain extra speed on landing to compensate for the left turning tendency.
The pilot stated he attempted to land on the right side of the runway, but as he did the airplane veered left and drifted off of the runway.
It collided with a runway light and the ground.
The airplane came to rest back on the runway.
The pilot reported that he had zero flight hours within the last 90 days.
A witness reported that the battery was "dead" and the airplane had to be "jump started" so the flight could proceed.
He stated the airplane initially banked left on takeoff, but it straightened out and realigned with the runway.
After it climbed "fairly high", it returned to land at the airport.
He stated the airplane appeared to be "too fast to land".
The airplane touched down, lifted off, touched down, lifted off, and touched down for the third time.
On the last touchdown, the airplane landed on the nose wheel.
The nose wheel collapsed, and the airplane veered off the left side of the runway.
After sliding about 80 feet, the airplane came to rest on the runway.
Another witness confirmed that the airplane bounced multiple times while landing, then landed on the nose gear, collapsing it.
The airplane then slid off the left side of the runway.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 78, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
