National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LAKE WALES, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA157
Date & Time: 05/02/1997, 1415 EDT
Registration: N14525
Aircraft: Thacker STARDUSTER TOO SA300
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the takeoff roll, the aircraft drifted to the right, and application of left rudder did not correct the drift.
The aircraft went off the right side of the runway, and the pilot aborted the takeoff.
With application of left brake the aircraft nosed over in the soft ground.
The pilot stated he had no mechanical difficulties with the aircraft and that he believed the tail wheel did not lock in the center detent during the start of the takeoff roll.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL LOCK - NOT ENGAGED 2.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE 3.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 4.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft received substantial damage and the airline transport-rated pilot was not injured.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that during takeoff on runway 6, the aircraft started drifting to the right while still at low speed.
Application of left rudder did not correct the drift and the right main landing gear tire went off the edge of the runway.
The aircraft was traveling at about 30 knots at this time.
The aircraft continued to drift right and he aborted the takeoff.
After closing the throttle he applied left brake and rudder in an attempt to turn the aircraft back onto the hard surface of the runway.
Immediately upon application of the left brake the aircraft nosed over in the soft ground.
The pilot stated there was no mechanical malfunctions with the aircraft and he believed that the tail wheel did not lock in the centered detent as he began his takeoff roll.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Engineer Age: 63, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
