National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RUSSELLVILLE, AL
Accident Number: ATL97LA066
Date & Time: 05/01/1997, 1100 CDT
Registration: N5778Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-22-180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Approximately 4 hours into the flight, while on a long descent to the destination airport, the pilot experienced a reduction in engine power.
The power reduction continued over a period of eight minutes and resulted in a complete loss of engine power.
Following the loss of power, the pilot's attempts to restore full engine power, which included the application of carburetor heat, failed.
The pilot selected a nearby paved road for an emergency landing.
During the landing roll out, the right wing collided with a road sign, and the airplane swerved  into an adjacent ditch and nosed over.
Examination of the airplane failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
Fuel was recovered from the fuel system.
During the  functional test of the engine, the engine operated normally through all power ranges.
A review of current weather information revealed that weather conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
A factor was conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
The personal flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with a flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane sustained substantial damage; the pilot was not injured.
The flight departed Quincy, Louisiana, at 0700.
According to the pilot, approximately four hours into the flight, while on a long descent to Muscle Shoals, Alabama, he experienced a reduction in engine power.
The power reduction continued over a period of eight minutes and resulted in a complete loss of engine power.
Following the loss of power, the pilot's attempts to restore full engine power, which included the application of carburetor heat, failed.
The pilot selected a nearby paved road for an emergency landing.
During the landing roll out, the right wing collided with a road sign, and the airplane swerved into an adjacent ditch and nosed over.
During the examination of the airplane approximately twelve gallons of fuel were recovered from the fuel system.
During the  functional test of the engine, the engine operated normally through all power ranges.
A review of current weather information revealed that weather conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
