Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Pearland, TX
Accident Number:
FTW04LA226
Date & Time:
09/01/2004, 1945 CDT 
Registration:
N3TW
Aircraft:
Cassutt IIIM
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 246.6-hour pilot was conducting a series of touch-and-go landings in an amateur-built 
race airplane.  While the airplane was turning from base leg to final within the airport traffic 
pattern, a witness observed the airplane "descending rapidly in a nose down" attitude through 
approximately 500 feet agl.  The witness stated that the airplane "fell straight down in a spin" 
until it impacted terrain.  Another witness located at the airport reported seeing the airplane 
turn left base at a bank angle of approximately 90 degrees.  Examination of the engine and 
airframe were conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration and no anomalies were noted.  
Review of the pilot's logbooks revealed he had accumulated approximately 2 hours in the 
accident make/model airplane.  The former owner of the accident airplane reported that the 
pilot had recently purchased the airplane approximately six months prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed sufficient for flight resulting in an inadvertent stall/spin 
while turning from the base leg of the traffic pattern to final.  A contributing factor was the 
pilot's lack of experience for the make/model airplane.
Page 2 of 6FTW04LA226
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - BASE LEG/BASE TO FINAL
Findings
1. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LACK OF EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6FTW04LA226
Factual Information
On September 1, 2004, approximately 1945 central daylight time, an amateur-built Cassutt 
IIIM single-engine airplane, N3TW, registered to and operated by a private individual, was 
destroyed when it impacted terrain following a loss of control while in the landing pattern at 
the Pearland Regional Airport (LVJ), near Pearland, Texas.  The private pilot, sole occupant of 
the airplane, was fatally injured.  Visual metrological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was 
not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local flight 
originated from LVJ approximately 40 minutes prior to the time of the accident. 
In a written statement, a witness, who was the pilot of a Cessna 206 that was on a left 
downwind for Runway 32R, at an altitude of 800 feet above ground level (agl), reported that he 
observed N3TW approximately 1/4 mile away "descending rapidly in a nose down attitude 
through approximately 500 feet agl."  The witness stated that the airplane "fell straight down in 
a spin" until it impacted terrain.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the site 
of the accident, another witness reported observing the airplane turn left base at a bank angle 
of approximately 90 degrees.  A family member of the pilot reported to the FAA inspector that 
the pilot stated that the airplane had approximately 6 gallons of automotive gasoline onboard 
the airplane prior to departure.  
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land rating.  His most 
recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class medical certificate was issued on 
December 13, 2002.
A review of the private pilot's logbook revealed that he accumulated approximately 241.6 flight 
hours.  As of June 16, 2004, the most recent logbook entry, the pilot had accumulated 2 hours 
of flight time in the accident make/model airplane.  
The 1974 Cassutt IIIM was an amateur built mid-wing airplane composed of a tubular steel 
frame covered by fabric.  The airplane was equipped with a Continental O-200-A engine rated 
at 100 horsepower.  The former owner of N3TW reported that he had recently sold the airplane 
to the pilot in February of 2004.  The former owner added that the airplane was designed for 
competition air racing and was "challenging to fly."
Review of the airplane logbooks revealed that the most recent Annual/100-hour inspection was 
performed on March 13, 2003, at an airframe and engine total time of 280.1 hours. The engine 
was last overhauled on August 8, 1994.
The Pearland Regional Airport features 3 runways: 14R/32L (4,302-foot long and 70-foot wide 
asphalt runway), 14L/32R (2,800-foot long and 90-foot wide turf runway), and 4/22 (2,400-
foot long and 100-foot wide turf runway).  The airport is an uncontrolled airfield operating 
under class G airspace.  The common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) is 122.8 megahertz.
At 1953, the automated surface observing system at LVJ reported wind calm, visibility 10 
statute miles, sky clear, temperature 80 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 63 degrees Fahrenheit, 
and an altimeter setting of 30.03 inches of Mercury.  The NTSB investigator-in-charge 
calculated the density altitude to be 1,376 feet.
Examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed that the airplane came to rest 
upright in a hay field approximately 1/2 mile south of LVJ.  The fuselage area forward of the aft 
Page 4 of 6FTW04LA226
section of the cockpit was crushed aft, and both wings were crushed aft throughout their 
respective spans.  Flight control continuity was established throughout the airplane.  The FAA 
inspector also reported that there was a strong odor of fuel at the accident site. 
On September 3, 2004, at the facilities of D&N Aviation, near Pearland, Texas, under the 
supervision of an FAA inspector, a representative from Teledyne Continental Motors, 
examined the Continental O-200-A engine (serial number 231221R).  
Examination of the engine revealed the left and right magnetos were separated form their 
respective mounts.  The oil sump was pushed aft and upwards.  The exhaust pipes were 
crushed upwards and aft.  The top sparkplugs were removed, and when compared to the 
Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug Chart, displayed moderate wear, dark deposits in the 
electrode area. Rotational continuity throughout the engine and accessories housing was 
established when the engine was rotated by hand using the propeller.  Compression was noted 
from all four cylinders.  The gascolator screen was absent of debris.  The carburetor was 
separated from its mount and was impact damaged.  No fuel was found within the gascolator 
bowl.  The throttle body was partially separated from the carburetor bowl.  The fuel screen was 
absent of debris.  No fuel was observed within the carburetor bowl.
The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft propeller flange.  One blade was separated 
approximately 1/3 of its length outboard of the propeller flange.  The other blade was crushed 
aft and splintered. 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the office of the Galveston County Medical Examiner 
in Galveston, Texas, on September 2, 2004.  According to the report, "The cause of 
death...[was] multiple blunt force injuries."  Toxicological tests performed by the Federal 
Aviation Administration's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) were negative for carbon 
monoxide, alcohol, however was positive for trace amounts (values confirmed by the FAA) of 
Sertraline, Desmethylsertraline, Diphenhydramine, and Burpropion.  
According to an FAA Medical Examiner, the use of Sertraline and Burpropion would have 
disqualified the pilot's medical certification if it had been reported.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/13/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
241 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 5 of 6FTW04LA226
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cassutt
Registration:
N3TW
Model/Series:
IIIM 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
088
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/18/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
850 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
280.1 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
Mary Jane Bernard
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
Michael G Bernard
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LVJ, 43 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Pearland, TX (LVJ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (LVJ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0700 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Pearland Regional Airport (LVJ)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
43 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4302 ft / 70 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Page 6 of 6FTW04LA226
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
29.521111, -95.241944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alexander Lemishko
Adopted Date:
02/24/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Pace; Houston, Texas; Houston, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
