Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
WILDWOOD, NJ
Accident Number:
NYC00LA214
Date & Time:
08/01/2000, 1430 EDT 
Registration:
N6195Z
Aircraft:
Piper PA-25
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
The pilot had performed a local banner-towing flight and after 45 minutes he decided to return 
to the airport.  While en route, the pilot advanced the throttle to initiate a climb; however, he 
got no response from the engine.  The engine began loosing power, and smoke appeared from 
under the cowling.  The oil temperature gauge was approaching red line speed, and the RPM 
gauge was decreasing; however, the oil pressure remained constant at 80 psi.  The pilot 
performed an emergency landing in a field, and after touchdown, the airplane struck a tree 
with its right wing.  Examination of the engine revealed a hole burned through the top of the 
#3 cylinder, consistent with detonation.  Advisory Circular AC65-12A stated that detonation 
can burn a hole completely through a piston. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The partial loss of power caused by detonation of the #3 piston. 
Page 2 of 6NYC00LA214
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) MISC,ENGINE PRE-IGNITION AND/OR DETONATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
2. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6NYC00LA214
Factual Information
 On August 1, 2000, at 1430 Eastern Daylight Time, a Piper PA-25, N6195Z, was substantially 
damaged during an emergency landing on a grass strip near Wildwood, New Jersey.  The 
certificated commercial pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and 
no flight plan was filed for the local banner-towing flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he departed the Paramount Air Airport (JY04), Green Creek, New 
Jersey, around 1330.  After about 45 minutes, he had "completed his run," and decided to 
return to JY04.  While en route, the pilot advanced the throttle to initiate a climb; however, he 
got "no response from the engine."  As he continued the flight toward JY04, the airplane was 
"loosing power," and smoke appeared from under the cowling.  The pilot dropped the banner 
he was towing to reduce drag on the airplane, and noticed the engine was "overtemping fast."  
The oil temperature gauge was "approaching red line speed," and the RPM gauge was 
decreasing; however, the oil pressure remained constant at 80 psi.  The pilot prepared for an 
emergency landing on a grass strip, performed one "circle pass" over the field, and added one 
notch of flaps.  After touchdown, the airplane struck a tree with its right wing, which spun the 
airplane around 180 degrees.
The pilot reported that just before landing, the oil temperature gauge had exceeded its red line 
value of 240 degrees, and was indicating 270 degrees.
On August 1, 2000 an on-scene examination of the airplane was conducted by a Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector.  The examination revealed that the engine was "very 
stiff to rotate."  The spark plugs were light gray in color, and all produced a spark, when 
current was applied to them.  In addition, metal residue was observed on both oil screens when 
extracted from the engine.  
The engine was removed from the accident site and disassembled in a hangar on August 22, 
2000, under the supervision of an FAA inspector.  According to the inspector's written 
statement, the cylinders were removed and observation of the #3 cylinder revealed a hole 
burned through the top of the piston "consistent with detonation."  The oil sump was removed 
and a fragment of a piston ring and metal residue was observed.  The oil pump drive gear and 
shaft were removed; however, the oil pump idler gear had seized and had to be forcibly 
removed.  The idler gear was unable to be rotated by hand.  The engine case halves were then 
separated and engine rotation could be observed.  Visual examination of the bearing shells 
revealed metal residue.
According to FAA publication AC65-12A, detonation is "the instantaneous and explosive 
burning of the fuel/air mixture.  The explosive burning during detonation results in an 
extremely rapid pressure rise.  This rapid pressure rise and the high instantaneous 
temperature, combined with the high turbulence generated, cause a 'scrubbing' action on the 
cylinder and the piston.  This can burn a hole completely through a piston."
The advisory circular further stated, "...the presence of severe detonation during its operation 
is indicated by dished piston heads, collapsed valve heads, broken ring lands, or eroded 
portions of valves, pistons, or cylinder heads."
Factors affecting detonation were described as design, cylinder cooling, magneto timing, 
mixture distribution, and carburetor settings.
Page 4 of 6NYC00LA214
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/20/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
389 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N6195Z
Model/Series:
PA-25 PA-25
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
25-229
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/19/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
53 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1848 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
PARAMOUNT AIR SERVICE
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
PARAMOUNT AIR SERVICE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC00LA214
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
WWD, 23 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1435 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
170°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
GREEN CREEK, NJ (JY04)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1330 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT       HANCOCK
Adopted Date:
05/08/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVE   GRASSO; PHILADELPHIA, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC00LA214
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
