Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
TULSA, OK
Accident Number:
FTW00LA222
Date & Time:
08/01/2000, 1000 CDT 
Registration:
N817R
Aircraft:
ROMERO SEA REY
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that during cruise flight at 1,100 to 1,200 msl in the vicinity of a lake, she 
'blacked out' and that she had 'no pre-warning of impending danger physical or otherwise.'  
The experimental amphibious airplane impacted the lake and came to rest floating upside 
down in the water.  Review of the pilot's medical records revealed the pilot had a heart 
condition diagnosed as PSVT (paroxysmal supraventricular tachcardia), and for over ten years 
had experienced episodes of symptomatic atrial fibrillation.  At the time of the accident, the 
pilot's experience was consistent with a transient ischemic attack (TIA or 'mini-stroke') as a 
result of a clot that formed in her heart. Such clots typically form during periods of atrial 
fibrillation and are propelled into the brain when the heart resumes beating normally again.  
The pilot had not complied with physician instructions regarding the use of medication.  On 
her FAA medical certificate applications (third class and second class), the pilot had not 
provided a complete medical history. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of control by the pilot due to incapacitation for unknown reasons. 
Page 2 of 6FTW00LA222
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) INCAPACITATION(LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS) - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER
Page 3 of 6FTW00LA222
Factual Information
 On August 1, 2000, at 1000 central daylight time, a Romero Sea Rey, homebuilt experimental 
amphibious airplane, N817R, sustained substantial damage when it impacted the water at Lake 
Keystone, approximately 15 nautical miles west of Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The airplane was owned 
and operated by private individuals under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The 
commercial pilot, sole occupant, received serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the local personal flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight departed the 
Richard Lloyd Jones Jr Airport, Tulsa, Oklahoma, at 0845.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported her 
intentions to fly over and around Lake Keystone with no intentions for landing.  The pilot 
reported that she had retracted the landing gear following the departure from Tulsa.  She 
remembered the airplane was configured at a power setting of 4,800 rpm and the airspeed of 
75 mph, with 10 degrees of flaps extended for the flight.  The airplane was at an altitude of 
1,100 to 1,200 msl.  The pilot further stated that "I blacked out," and that she had, "no pre-
warning of impending danger physical or otherwise."
Local authorities reported that the airplane was found intact and floating upside down in water 
approximately 7 to 10 feet deep, and it "appeared that the main landing gear was extended."  
The pilot completed dual flight training in Florida in the same make/model of aircraft.  The 
FAA airworthiness certificate was issued for the airplane on April 4, 2000.  The pilot had 
accumulated a total of 28 flight hours in the aircraft.  The pilot held a second class medical 
certificate, issued December 23, 1999, at the time of the accident.     
The following information was extracted by the NTSB Medical Officer from medical records 
maintained on the pilot by the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute Aeromedical Certification 
Division and from personal medical records supplied by the pilot.  The pilot was diagnosed 
with an abnormal heart rhythm in 1987.  By May 1990, following a full cardiac workup, the 
pilot was placed on medication.    
In August 1990, the pilot applied for a third-class medical.  The pilot's physician(s) reported to 
the FAA that the pilot's PSVT (paroxysmal superventricular tachycardia) was under control 
with medication.  In a letter submitted to the FAA, one of the physicians wrote that the heart 
condition "would not handicap her in any way in the operation of an airplane."  
The pilot was issued an FAA third-class medical certificate in November 1990, and an FAA 
second-class medical certificate in 1994.  Each time a medical certificate was issued, the pilot's 
eligibility letter from the FAA stated that the pilot's operation of an aircraft was prohibited any 
time new symptoms or changes occurred, or if the pilot experienced side effects or required a 
change in medication.
The pilot had several episodes of atrial fibrillation that were not reported to the FAA.  In 1996, 
the pilot did not report to the FAA an episode of a sudden loss of vision in one eye, which was 
attributed to cardiac embolization secondary to PSVT.  Following the loss of vision, she was 
prescribed Coumadin (a blood thinner).  The pilot continued to experience episodes of 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.  The use of Coumadin was not reported to the FAA.  
Emergency room records, following the accident, said "she [pilot] is supposed to be on 
Coumadin, but she refuses to take it."  The pilot demonstrated "intermittent atrial fibrillation, 
Page 4 of 6FTW00LA222
rapid ventricular response during the hospitalization."  
In a letter to the NTSB Medical Officer dated February 22, 2001, the pilot stated "I would 
always have warning when an episode of atrial fibrillation would be coming on.  Of course I 
never flew when I had any symptoms, nor did I have any symptoms the day of the accident."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
57, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/23/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
911 hours (Total, all aircraft), 36 hours (Total, this make and model), 41 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROMERO
Registration:
N817R
Model/Series:
SEA REY SEA REY
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
IDK198
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/30/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1370 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
12 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
27 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
912S
Registered Owner:
GABRIEL AND SONDRA 
ROMERO
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
GABRIEL AND SONDRA 
ROMERO
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW00LA222
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TUL, 638 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0853 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 10000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, OK (RVS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0845 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JOYCE        ROACH
Adopted Date:
07/02/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
RICHARD   FLETCHER; OKLAHOMA CITY, OK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW00LA222
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
