Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BOCA RATON, FL
Accident Number:
MIA99LA117
Date & Time:
04/02/1999, 1557 EST 
Registration:
N820MM
Aircraft:
Waco YMF-5
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that during maneuvering flight, at about 500 feet agl, and 
1/2 mile offshore, the engine and cowling began to shake, the engine began to sputter, and the 
windscreens became covered with oil. He made a turn westbound toward land, and declared an 
emergency, intending to land at the nearest airport. He reported the engine power available 
would not sustain level flight, and he started a slow descent. Neither the pilot nor his front seat 
passenger acquired a visual on the airport. The pilot overflew the airport and forced landed in a 
residential area 2 miles west of the airport. Examination of the engine revealed failure of the 12 
cylinder holddown studs of the No. 7 cylinder. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to select a suitable forced landing site following a partial loss of engine power 
due to failed cylinder holdddown studs, and the subsequent collision with trees.  A factor in the 
accident was the reduced forward visibility from the dual open cockpits due to windshield 
obscuration by engine oil. 
Page 2 of 6MIA99LA117
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. ENGINE ASSEMBLY,OTHER - FRACTURED
2. REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. (F) VISUAL LOOKOUT - RESTRICTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6MIA99LA117
Factual Information
 On April 2,1999, about 1557 eastern standard time, a Waco YMF-5, N820MM, 
registered to MD Aero, Inc., operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed in a 
residential area in Boca Raton, Florida, following an engine failure. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan  was filed.  The airplane received substantial damage, 
the private-rated pilot sustained serious injuries, and a passenger sustained minor injuries. 
The flight originated from Fort Lauderdale's Executive Airport (FXE), about 17 minutes before 
the accident.
According to the pilot, the flight was maneuvering at 500 feet agl, about 1/2 mile off the 
coast northeast of Boca Raton when the engine and cowling began to shake, the engine began 
to sputter, and the windscreens became covered with oil. He stated that the engine power 
available was not enough to sustain level flight, so he set up a slow rate of descent and an 
immediate turn westbound.  He declared an emergency with FAA Pompano Control Tower, 
told them he would try to make an emergency landing at Boca Raton Airport, and was given the 
unicom frequency for Boca Raton.  He switched to the Boca frequency and raised a young 
woman's voice who said she would get help.  He stated he could hear other aircraft in the traffic 
pattern stating they would yield to the emergency, but he made no further calls. 
At about 1543, according to FAA Pompano Control Tower personnel, N820MM called 
that he just departed FXE eastbound and asked for clearance to transit their area along the 
beach in a south to north direction. At about 1552, he had reached the northern limit of 
Pompano's airspace and was cleared for a radio frequency change.  At about 1554, Pompano 
tower heard a Mayday call from N820MM, and at about 1555, the pilot said he had an oil leak 
and would try to land at the Boca Raton Airport.  
According to a pilot in the traffic pattern at Boca Raton Airport, when N820MM 
declared his emergency and stated his engine problem, he obtained a visual on the Waco and 
watched him proceed westbound from a point about 2 miles east of the airport.  It became 
obvious to the pilot that the Waco pilot and passenger did not or could not see the Boca airport, 
because they flew "..right over the numbers for runway 23 at Boca, but kept on flying 
westbound".
According to the Boca Raton Police Services Department, the pilot advised them that the 
airplane "..developed engine problems and was trying to make Boca Raton Airport and was 
unable to see the runway and overshot the airport and crashed in the field."  The airplane 
collided with trees in a residential area and came to rest inverted.
According to FAA inspectors, the airplane crashed about 2 miles west of the Boca Raton 
Airport, within a residential area. Postcrash examination of the Jacobs radial engine by FAA 
inspectors revealed the power loss was caused by the failure of the No. 7 cylinder holddown 
studs and the resultant lifting of the cylinder off its seat.  Three of a total of 12 holddown studs, 
located on the aft side of the cylinder, revealed rust on their fractured surfaces.  The remaining 
studs exhibited overload fractures.  Piston wear marks on the walls of No. 7 cylinder reveal 
tilting of the cylinder away from the studs with rusted fracture sites.  The power loss and oil 
leakage were the result of induction piping and oil line connections being stripped when the 
cylinder started lifting off its seat.  Inspectors reported that the only thing holding No. 7 
cylinder on the engine was baffling jammed against the cowl.  About 140 engine operating 
hours before the accident, on March 3, 1998, the engine was reinstalled by General Aviation, 
Page 4 of 6MIA99LA117
Inc. of Lansing, Michigan, after a Jacobs Engine, Inc. factory teardown inspection due to a 
landing nose over incident.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/03/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2228 hours (Total, all aircraft), 547 hours (Total, this make and model), 2088 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 36 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Waco
Registration:
N820MM
Model/Series:
YMF-5 YMF-5
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
F5C056
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/03/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
156 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
731 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Jacobs
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
R755B2M
Registered Owner:
MD AERO, INC.
Rated Power:
275 hp
Operator:
MD AERO, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA99LA117
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PBI, 17 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
21 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
10°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 6000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
FT. LAUDERDALE, FL (FXE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1540 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ALAN       C STONE
Adopted Date:
04/19/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVID   HAMMOND; FT. LAUDERDALE, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA99LA117
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
