The pilot advanced the throttle for takeoff until the throttle was completely in and at the hub. 
He initially noted the rpm showed 2,300, rpm and during the takeoff roll the rpm showed 
2,500 rpm. The Pilot's Operating Handbook states that full throttle 2,700 rpm is required for 
takeoff.  The throttle slipped back about 1/2 inch on two different occasions, and the pilot 
pushed the throttle back in. No increase in engine power was noted and he continued the 
takeoff roll. Once airborne, the pilot retracted the landing gear and continued applying full 
throttle. The throttle felt like it was sticking and the engine was not producing full power. The 
airplane reached about 75 to 100 feet, and was not climbing.  The pilot realized he would not 
clear wires and trees to his immediate front and applied aft pressure on the control yoke to 
decrease his airspeed and the impending impact. Examination of the airplane wreckage 
revealed the throttle cable was hard to move and fractured. The throttle cable was removed, 
and forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory. The examination revealed the fractures were 
typical of bending overstress while the cable was under a tension load. No determination was 
made for the loss of engine power.
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.  The pilot's failure to attain full power for 
takeoff in accordance with the operation handbook was a  factor.
On February 2, 2003, at 1206 eastern standard time, a Beech A24R, N9769L, registered to a 
private owner, collided with wires and trees on initial takeoff climb from runway 09 at Space 
Coast Regional Airport, Titusville, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
private pilot reported serious injuries and the three passengers reported minor injuries. The 
flight originated from Titusville, Florida, on February 2, 2003, at 1205.
The pilot advanced the throttle for takeoff until the throttle was completely in and at the hub. 
He initially noted the rpm showed 2,300, rpm and during the takeoff roll the rpm showed 
2,500 rpm. The throttle slipped back about 1/2 inch on two different occasions, and he pushed 
the throttle back in. No increase in engine power was noted and he continued the takeoff roll. 
The pilot stated he probably had enough runway left to stop the airplane if he had aborted the 
takeoff soon enough. Once airborne, the pilot retracted the landing gear and continued 
applying full throttle. The throttle felt like it was sticking and the engine was not producing full 
power. The airplane reached about 75 to 100 feet, and was not climbing. The wind was out of 
the south and the pilot started a turn. The pilot stated he knew the airplane was not going to 
clear the wires and trees. The pilot applied aft pressure on the control yoke to decrease his 
airspeed and lessen the impending collision. 
The controller in charge at Space Coast Regional Tower stated the pilot departed from runway 
9. The ground run appeared to be slow. The airplane rotated and climbed to about 15 to 20 feet 
above the runway and flew straight ahead. Just before colliding with wires and trees he 
observed the nose of the airplane to pitch up.
Review of  the Pilot's Operating Handbook, Section II Limitations, Power Plant Limitations 
states, "Take-off and Maximum Continuous Power......... Full throttle or 2700 rpm, whichever 
occurs first." Section IV Normal Procedures states, "Takeoff.....................Full throttle- 2700 
RPM."
Examination of the crash site revealed the throttle cable was hard to move and would not move 
through the full range of travel. The cable was removed and visually inspected. The inner cable 
separated near the swaged assembly connected to the throttle handle. The throttle cable 
assembly was forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further analysis. Examination 
revealed the inner cable was fractured near the cockpit end of the assembly. Magnified optical 
examination of the fracture area revealed the seven individual wires of the inner cable were all 
deformed in a common direction adjacent to the fracture. The fractures were all typical 
overstress breaks, and there was no evidence of wear or corrosion deterioration at the fracture 
location. Fracture features and associated deformation were consistent with a bending 
overstress fracture while the cable was under a tension load.
Review of the airplane logbooks revealed the throttle cable had not been replaced since the 
airplane was manufactured. The engine control cables were lubed on  October 7, 2001, and the 
last annual inspection was on November 11, 2002. The total time on the throttle cable at the 
time of the accident was 4,533 hours.
The aircraft wreckage was released to the registered owner on February 4, 2003. The throttle 
cable assembly was released to Atlanta Air Recovery, Griffin, Georgia, on April 30, 2003.
