The airplane experienced a loss of control, which resulted in a stall/mush while practicing 
touch-and-go takeoffs and landings.  The pilot stated he "lost control" of the airplane during a 
landing and added power to execute a go-around and pulled up.  An airline pilot, who reported 
having approximately 11,500 hours total time with about 250 hours in the Pitts S-2B, 
witnessed the accident.  He said that when he first saw the airplane it was on a divergent course 
to the left side of runway 25R at an altitude of 5 feet.  As the airplane came to the left edge of 
the runway it made a pull up, resulting in the nose coming up about 60 degrees.  It continued 
on its upward path while rotating right.  At approximately 25 feet, the nose passed vertical; at 
the 180-degree point of rotation, the right wing struck the ground followed by the nose.  The 
witness pilot further reported that the airplane landed with a left, quartering tailwind of an 
estimated 8 knots.  A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the 
airplane.  The brakes and tailwheel steering were found in working order.  Flight control 
continuity could not be established because of the post impact fire.
The pilot's excessive pull up, which resulted in a failure to obtain/maintain flying speed and a 
subsequent stall/mush.
On February 1, 2003, about 1050 Pacific standard time, a Pitts S-2B, N300PS, experienced a 
loss of control and stalled while practicing touch-and-go takeoffs and landings at Long Beach 
Daugherty Field (LGB), Long Beach, California.  Hart Air, Ltd., was operating the rental 
airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The private pilot sustained serious injuries; 
the airplane sustained substantial damage.  Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
the local, personal flight, and no flight plan had been filed.  The flight originated about 1020 
from Long Beach.
The pilot told a certified flight instructor that he "touched down at an angle to the centerline 
and bounced."  He further stated that he "lost control" of the airplane.  He added power to 
initiate a go-around and pulled up. 
An airline pilot, who reported having approximately 11,500 hours total time with about 250 
hours in the Pitts S-2B, witnessed the accident.  In a written statement, he said that he was 
unsure if the airplane touched down but when it came into view it was on a divergent course to 
the left side of runway 25R at an altitude of 5 feet.  He felt the airplane had a higher than 
normal approach speed.  As the airplane came to the left edge of the runway it made a pull up, 
resulting in the nose coming up about 60 degrees.  It continued on its upward path while 
rotating right.  At approximately 25 feet, the nose passed vertical; at the 180-degree point of 
rotation, the right wing struck the ground followed by the nose.  The airplane remained on its 
nose for approximately  2 seconds and then "burst into flame" from the nose back.  The flames 
moved rearward engulfing the left side of the airplane.  The airline pilot further reported that 
the airplane landed with a left, quartering tailwind of an estimated 8 knots. 
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the airplane.  The brakes 
and tailwheel steering were found in working order.  Flight control continuity could not be 
established because of the post impact fire.  The airplane came to rest facing east, 180 degrees 
from its original flight path.
