The private certificated pilot reported that he made a precautionary landing at a private airport 
on a 4,500 foot, gravel surfaced runway that was oriented north/south.  He said he overflew 
the airport and saw another airplane parked on the north end of the runway.  He said he 
decided to land toward the south, beyond the parked airplane.  The pilot said a tailwind was 
blowing from the north about 6 knots.  The pilot was familiar with the airport and knew the 
runway ran slightly uphill toward the south.  He said that he did not think the downwind 
landing would be a problem, and touched down just beyond the half-way point on the runway 
and allowed the airplane to coast.  As the airplane neared the end of the runway, he applied the 
airplane's brakes.  The pilot said he then realized the runway surface was glazed with ice, and 
the airplane began to slide sideways.  The left main landing gear collided with a snow berm at 
the south end of the runway, and the left wing struck the snow.  The pilot indicated the 
accident could have been prevented by "attempt to use brakes immediately after touchdown 
(landing) to get a good idea of surface conditions."
The pilot's delayed application of the airplane brakes resulting in an overrun during the 
landing roll, and subsequent collision with a snowbank.  A contributing factor in the accident 
was icy runway conditions.
On February 1, 2003, about 1400 Alaska standard time, a tailwheel-equipped Cessna 150 
airplane, N704JB, sustained substantial damage when it overran the runway, and collided with 
a snow berm at the Trading Bay Airport, a private airport located about 21 miles north-
northwest of Kenai, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local 
area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was 
operated by the pilot.  The private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The flight originated at Johnson's Airstrip, Kenai, 
about 1130.  No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on February 1, the pilot reported that he was planning to land at 
the Trading Bay Airport.  He said he overflew the airport and saw another airplane parked on 
the north end of the runway.  The runway is oriented north/south, and is about 4,500 feet long.  
The pilot said he observed what he thought was a coating of gravel on the runway.  The pilot 
reported that he decided to land toward the south, beyond the parked airplane.  The pilot said a 
tailwind was blowing from the north about 6 knots.  He touched down just beyond the half-way 
point on the runway and allowed the airplane to coast.  As the airplane neared the end of the 
runway, he applied the airplane's brakes.  The pilot said he then realized the runway surface 
was glazed with ice, and the airplane began to slide sideways.  The left main landing gear 
collided with a snow berm at the south end of the runway, and the left wing struck the snow.  
After the collision, the pilot said his inspection indicated the left main landing gear strut was 
loose at its fuselage attach point.  On February 5, the pilot confirmed the airplane's left main 
landing gear attach point received structural damage, and the upper surface of the left wingtip 
was slightly wrinkled.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, he 
indicated that his reason for landing at the Trading Bay Airport was a precaution to inspect the 
airplane following a 200 rpm loss of engine power.  He indicated that he was familiar with the 
airport and knew the runway ran slightly uphill toward the south.  He said that he did not think 
the downwind landing would be a problem.  In the optional, "Operator/Owner Safety 
Recommendation", portion of the NTSB Form 6120.1, the pilot indicated the accident could 
have been prevented by "attempt to use brakes immediately after touchdown (landing) to get a 
good idea of surface conditions."
