The airplane received substantial damage during a high speed pull-up while recovering from an 
unusual attitude after a loss of control during an instrument training flight in actual 
instrument meteorological conditions.  The ceiling was reported to be overcast at 700 feet 
above ground level.  The airplane subsequently returned to the departure airport.  The certified 
flight instructor who was on-board the airplane reported that pre-departure checks of the flight 
instruments were normal.  He said that, during the flight the gyroscopic flight instrument 
became unusable.  A postaccident examination revealed that the turn coordinator circuit 
breaker was in the open position.  Further testing revealed no detectable defects in the 
gyroscopic flight instruments and instrument pressure system.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control which resulted in the overload of the aircraft.  
Spatial disorientation, an inoperative turn coordinator, and the pilot's misinterpretation of the 
flight instruments were contributing factors.
On February 01, 2003, about 0800 eastern standard time, a Beech A36, N5677X, piloted by a 
certified flight instructor (CFI) and dual student, sustained substantial damage  during a 
recovery from an unusual attitude after a loss of control during instrument flight.  The non-
instrument rated dual student held a private pilot certificate with a single engine land rating.  
The 14 CFR Part 91 training flight was operated in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) 
with an instrument flight plan.  No injuries were reported.  The flight originated from the 
Gerald R. Ford International Airport (GRR), Grand Rapids, Michigan, about 10 minutes prior 
to the loss of control.  The destination has not been determined.
The weather reporting station located at the departure airport recorded the ceiling and 
visibility as overcast ceiling at 700 feet above ground level, and 7 statute miles respectively.  
The report was taken about 4 minutes prior to the accident.
The CFI reported that prior to departure checks of the engine and flight instruments were 
normal.  He stated that the takeoff was uneventful.  Shortly after takeoff the airplane entered 
IMC.  The CFI said he noticed that the airplane was in a 30 degree bank and he applied right 
aileron to correct.  He said that a subsequent scan of the turn coordinator showed wings level.  
He said that another scan of the attitude indicator showed a bank angle in excess of 60 degrees.  
The CFI stated that he assumed control of the airplane and determined that the gyroscopic 
instruments were not usable.  According to the CFI, the airplane exited IMC in an unusual, 
high speed, nose down, left bank attitude and the he used right aileron and up elevator to 
recover.  The CFI regained control below the overcast and returned to the departure airport.  
The airplane was substantially damaged due to the pull up during recovery.
A postaccident examination of the airplane was conducted.  The wings, horizontal stabilizer 
skins were wrinkled.  Further examination revealed that the wing and horizontal stabilizer 
spars were damaged.  During the examination, the turn coordinator circuit breaker was found 
in the open position.  A run up and taxi test confirmed that the primary and backup instrument 
pressure systems were operational.  The pressure gyroscopic instruments functioned without 
noticeable defect during the test.  Additionally, the turn coordinator circuit breaker was reset 
and no noticeable defects in operation were found during the test.  
Subsequent to the taxi testing, the artificial horizon indicator (AHI) was removed for further 
examination.  Bench testing of the AHI was performed by a certified repair station under the 
supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration official.  The testing of the AHI revealed that 
the unit was in an airworthy condition.
