The airplane collided with a car crossing the runway.  After the airplane touched down on the 
dirt strip, a car pulled out to cross the runway.  The pilot attempted to go around but the left 
main gear hit the car and sheared off.  The airplane skidded down the runway and veered off to 
the left, which resulted in substantial damage to the wing and fuselage.  The airstrip was 
marked with "stop" and "landing area" signs; however, the car did not stop before crossing the 
airstrip. 
The driver of the vehicle did not stop prior to crossing the airstrip as directed by airstrip 
signage.
On February 1, 2003, at 1110 mountain standard time, a Beech S-35, N6106V, collided with a 
car crossing the runway at Desert Gardens Airstrip, Quartzsite, Arizona.  The pilot/owner was 
operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The private pilot and one 
passenger were not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The personal flight 
departed Palomar Airport, Carlsbad, California, about 1000 Pacific standard time.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed during the flight and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated that he flew from Montgomery Field, San Diego, California, to Carlsbad, and 
then filed IFR to Blythe, California.  He arrived at Blythe, canceled his IFR flight plan, and 
continued on to Desert Gardens Airstrip (a dirt strip).  A road crosses the runway, and a car 
pulled out to cross the runway.  The pilot touched down and saw the car.  He tried to go 
around, but the left main gear hit the car and sheared off.  The airplane skidded down the 
runway and veered off to the left, which resulted in substantial damage to the wing and 
fuselage.
In a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator, the 
airstrip owner stated that the airstrip was marked with "stop" and "landing area" signs; 
however, the car did not stop before crossing the airstrip.  As the car crossed the airstrip, it 
stopped.  The owner further reported that the road crossing the airstrip was closed as a result 
of the accident.
