The student pilot reported that his descent to the airport and approach to runway 25 was 
normal with the exception of a minor crosswind correction for winds blowing from the north.  
The pilot reported that when the airplane touched down it momentarily ballooned and drifted 
to the left (south).  He stated that he held the airplane "steady" and when the airplane touched 
down a second time, it touched down on the runway edge with the left wheel off the runway.  
The airplane turned sharply to the south and exited the runway.  After exiting the runway the 
airplane traveled across rough uneven terrain and an adjacent taxiway, eventually coming to 
rest south of the intended runway.  No mechanical difficulties or malfunctions were reported.   
Improper flare while landing.  Factors include rough uneven terrain.
On February 1, 2003, about 1430 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-28-140, N75392, sustained 
substantial damage when the airplane departed the runway edge and encountered rough 
terrain during landing at the Prosser Municipal Airport, Prosser, Washington.  The student 
pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  The airplane is owned by Noland 
Decoto Flying Service of Yakima, Washington, and was being operated as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) instructional flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident 
occurred.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan had been filed.  The 
round-robin cross-country flight originated from Yakima, with intermediate stops in Walla 
Walla, Washington, and Prosser.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board on February 4, 
and subsequent written report dated February 6, the student pilot reported that his descent to 
the airport and approach to runway 25 was normal with the exception of a minor crosswind 
correction for winds blowing from the north.  The pilot reported that when the airplane 
touched down it momentarily ballooned and drifted to the left (south).  He stated that he held 
the airplane "steady" and when the airplane touched down a second time, it touched down on 
the runway edge with the left wheel off the runway.  The airplane turned sharply to the south 
and exited the runway.  After exiting the runway the airplane traveled across rough uneven 
terrain and an adjacent taxiway, eventually coming to rest south of the intended runway.
No mechanical difficulties or malfunctions were reported.   
  
