During a test flight on the morning of the accident, the engine was running rough; however, the 
pilot landed the airplane without further incident.  The pilot removed the carburetor screen, 
cleaned the debris from the screen, and reinstalled the screen.  During the accident flight, the 
oil and water temperature indicated 205-210 degrees, and the flight was returning to the 
airport.  At an airspeed of 70 knots and an altitude of 500 feet agl, there was a total loss of 
engine power.  The pilot performed the emergency landing procedures; however, he was not 
able to turn the airplane into the wind due to an unsafe landing area east of the airport traffic 
pattern for the runway. The pilot landed the airplane with a right quartering tailwind (25 knots, 
gusts 30 knots) in a field.  During the landing roll, the nose landing gear struck a berm, the 
nose landing gear collapsed, and the airplane structure twisted as the airplane came to rest.  
The reason for the loss of engine power was not determined.  The pilot reported the winds were 
from the southwest at 25 knots with gust to 30 knots.  The airplane had accumulated 27.6 
hours of the required 40 hours of flight time under the operating limitations for the homebuilt 
airplane.
  
The loss of engine power for an undetermined reason.  Contributing factors were the lack of 
suitable terrain for the forced landing and the unfavorable wind.
On February 1, 2003, approximately 1300 central standard time, a Gilbertson Zodiac 
CH601HDS experimental airplane, N474BG, struck a berm during a forced landing following a 
total loss of engine power near Grandfield, Oklahoma.  The airplane was built, owned, and 
operated by the pilot under 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The airline 
transport pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured, and the airplane sustained 
substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight 
plan was not filed.  The test flight originated from Chattanooga Sky Harbor Airport (92F) at 
Chattanooga, Oklahoma, approximately 1240.
The 5,043 hour pilot reported to the FAA inspector that during a flight that morning, the 73 
horsepower Subaru automotive engine was running rough; however, he landed the airplane 
without further incident.  The carburetor screen was removed, cleaned of debris, and 
reinstalled by the pilot.  
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot reported that 
during the accident flight, the oil and water temperature indicated 205-210 degrees, and the 
pilot elected to return to the airport at an initial altitude of 700 feet agl.  At an airspeed of 70 
knots and an altitude of 500 feet agl, there was a total loss of engine power.  The pilot 
performed the emergency landing procedures.  The pilot was not able to turn the airplane into 
the wind due to an unsafe landing area east of the airport traffic pattern for runway 17.  The 
pilot attempted a 270 degree turn to a landing area; however, due to the decreasing altitude 
and airspeed (55 knots) of the airplane, he was not able to compete the turn.  The pilot landed 
the airplane in a field with a right quartering tailwind.  During the landing roll, the nose 
landing gear struck a berm, the nose landing gear collapsed, and the airplane came to rest 110 
feet from the initial impact point in the field.  The pilot reported the winds were from the 
southwest at 25 knots, with gust to 30 knots. 
The FAA inspector reported that during the impact sequence, the airplane structure twisted, 
and the firewall and all components forward of the firewall separated from the airplane.  The 
integrity of the fuel tank was compromised.  The airplane had accumulated 27.6 hours of the 
required 40 hours of flight time under the operating limitations for the homebuilt airplane.
