Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bountiful, UT
Accident Number:
WPR15FA051
Date & Time:
12/02/2014, 1400 MST 
Registration:
N3234U
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY 
R44
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Flight control sys malf/fail
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Before the accident flight, the commercial helicopter pilot, who was also a mechanic, had re-
installed the main rotor blades, which had just been reworked, on the helicopter. The accident 
flight was a test flight to adjust the track and balance of the rotor blades. A mechanic, who 
spoke with the pilot a few weeks before the accident, stated that they had a discussion about an 
elongated pitch change link attachment hole on the accident helicopter and how to address it. 
On the night before the accident flight, they spoke again; the pilot was having trouble tracking 
the blades on the accident helicopter. The pilot stated that he could not get the blades to track 
any better, and that he was trying to change the track with the trim tabs.
Witnesses in the area of the accident site heard "popping" or "banging" sounds, then saw the 
main rotor and empennage separate from the helicopter. Several of the witnesses then saw the 
helicopter tumble in flight and impact the roof of a building. The main rotor and empennage 
came to rest on the ground a few hundred feet from the building. Witness statements and 
wreckage documentation were consistent with a main rotor blade striking the tail and 
subsequently, a mast bump, which resulted in the helicopter descending uncontrollably.
The damage observed on the components of the main rotor system was consistent with an in-
flight separation of the pitch change link for the red blade, with separation occurring at the 
location where the pitch change link attached to the swashplate. The swashplate was free of 
contact marks corresponding to contact with the red pitch change link, which contrasted with 
the area around the blue blade pitch change link attachment, where multiple contact marks 
corresponding to contact with the blue pitch change link were observed. Also, the red pitch 
change link was intact and relatively straight, indicating that separation occurred under loads 
less than that required to buckle or fracture the pitch change link. The slight bending in the red 
pitch change links was likely secondary to the separation of the attachment at the lower end as 
evidenced by the location of the corresponding thread contact marks on the pitch horn. Finally, 
a series of impressions corresponding to contact with threads on the red blade pitch change 
link attachment bolt were observed on the attachment hole bore through the swashplate in an 
Page 2 of 10WPR15FA051
area that should have only contacted the grip portion of the bolt. Thus, it is likely that the intact 
bolt separated from the attachment due to loss of the lock nut and palnut.
Torque measurements were obtained on the locknuts installed on the three recovered pitch 
change link attachment bolts. All measured torque values were lower than that specified in the 
helicopter's maintenance manual, indicating that the fasteners were improperly torqued before 
the accident. While torque for the missing attachment bolt could not be measured, the torque 
measured on the remaining pitch change link attachment bolts and witness marks on the 
attachment hole bore in the swashplate suggest that the bolt likely separated due to insufficient 
torque applied at the time of installation, which led to the loss of the locknut and palnut due to 
vibrational loads under normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot/mechanic's failure to properly secure the pitch link hardware of one main rotor blade 
to the rotating swash plate, which resulted in the pitch link separating in flight and a 
subsequent loss of control.
Findings
Aircraft
Main rotor mast/swashplate - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Replacement - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Incorrect action performance - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 10WPR15FA051
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 2, 2014, about 1400 mountain standard time, a Robinson R44 II helicopter, 
N3234U, impacted a two-story building while maneuvering near Skypark Airport (BTF), 
Bountiful, Utah. The commercial pilot/mechanic and passenger were fatally injured, and the 
helicopter was substantially damaged. The helicopter was registered to Native Range Capture 
Services, Inc., Elko, Nevada, and operated by Native Range, Inc, Ventura, California. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the area, and no flight plan was filed for the local, post-
maintenance test flight, which was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. The flight departed from BTF shortly before the accident.
According to the owner of the helicopter, the pilot/mechanic was performing maintenance on 
the main rotor assembly and the purpose of the post-maintenance flight was part of the 
procedure to "track and balance" the main rotor blades. This maintenance spanned over 
several days.
Several witnesses in the area of the accident site heard "popping" or "banging" sounds then saw 
the main rotor and empennage separate from the helicopter. Some of the witnesses then saw 
the helicopter tumble in flight and impact the top of a building. The main rotor and empennage 
came to rest on the ground a few hundred feet from the impacted building. Security camera 
video footage from a nearby business captured the helicopter in the air shortly after the 
separation of the main rotor and empennage.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 65, held a commercial pilot certificate with rotorcraft, airplane single-engine 
land, multi-engine land, and instrument ratings. The pilot held a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) second-class medical certificate, which was issued on April 1, 2014, with 
no limitations. The pilot reported on his most recent medical certificate application that he had 
accumulated 5,500 total hours of flight experience. The pilot was issued a mechanic certificate 
on August 17, 2012, with ratings for airframe and powerplant. He attended the Robinson 
Helicopter Company's maintenance course in December 2008.
The passenger, age 63, held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine 
land. He held an FAA third-class medical certificate, issued on October 26, 2006, with the 
limitations that he must have available glasses for near vision, and not valid for any class after. 
The pilot reported on his most recent medical certificate application that he had accumulated 
250 total hours of flight experience. He was issued a mechanic certificate on September 9, 
2008, with ratings for airframe and powerplant. He had not attended the Robinson Helicopter 
Company's maintenance course.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 10WPR15FA051
The four-seat helicopter was manufactured in February 2007. It was powered by a Lycoming 
IO-540-AE1A5 reciprocating engine rated at 205 horsepower.
The helicopter's owner stated that, during a flight in the accident helicopter the month before 
the accident, the helicopter "had a bit of a vertical [vertical vibrations]". The blades also had 
noticeable slop and movement in the pitch change link bolt attachment to the swashplate. 
During a 100-hour inspection, on November 2, 2014, at 582 hours of helicopter total time, the 
owner and pilot/mechanic recommended sending the blades out for rework. According to 
airframe records, the [red] main rotor blade pitch horn was replaced, and the pilot-rated 
mechanic declined repainting of the blades. When the blades returned, the owner hired the 
pilot-rated mechanic to install the blades and track them in a heavier configuration.
According to a mechanic who spoke with the pilot a few weeks before the accident, they 
discussed an elongated pitch change link attachment hole on the accident helicopter and how 
to address it. On the night before the accident flight, they spoke again, and the pilot said he was 
having trouble tracking the blades on the accident helicopter. He reported that the blades could 
not track any better than a 1/2-inch separation, and that he was using the trim tabs to change 
the track. The mechanic suggested that the pilot use the fine adjustments on the pitch change 
links, then fly through all flight regimes, and fine tune with the trim tabs. He recommended to 
the pilot to look at the entire rotor system and thought that something was amiss.
Review of the helicopter's maintenance records showed that on September 12, 2007, at 87.3 
hours total time, the hub and blades were rebuilt by Robinson Helicopter Company. The 
spindles, which include the pitch horns, were reused during the rebuild.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1353 weather observation at Salt Lake City International Airport (SLC), Salt Lake City, 
Utah, located 5 miles south of the accident site, reported wind from 320 degrees at 3 knots, 
visibility 10 statute miles, scattered clouds at 15,000 feet above ground level, broken clouds at 
19,000 above ground level, temperature 8 degrees C, dew point 2 degrees C, and an altimeter 
setting of 30.05 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) revealed a wreckage debris field about 880 ft in length, about 400 
ft in width, and oriented on a 277° magnetic heading. The main rotor and empennage 
separated from the main wreckage before impact and were found within the wreckage debris 
field. The main rotor assembly was found near a parking lot about 188 ft from the main 
wreckage. The empennage separated from the main wreckage and was found near a parking lot 
about 430 ft from the main wreckage. Several sections of the tail rotor drive shaft were found 
throughout the debris field. A large section of the tail rotor drive shaft pierced the roof about 
90 ft from where the fuselage entered the roof. Both pitch change links and transmission 
housing material were found throughout the debris field. Plexiglas sections were found 
throughout the debris field. A 4-ft section of the main rotor blade tip was found in a retention 
pond and was furthest from the main wreckage.
Page 5 of 10WPR15FA051
The main wreckage impacted and penetrated the roof of a two-story building about 2,000 ft 
southwest of the approach end of runway 34 at BTF. A postimpact fire occurred; however, the 
building's sprinkler system was activated, and an overhead sprinkler pressure line was 
separated near the main wreckage, releasing water and limiting the postimpact fire to the main 
wreckage. The main wreckage displayed impact damage and was partially damaged by the fire.
The wreckage was recovered to a secure facility for further examination. The main wreckage, 
consisting of the cabin area and a 5-ft section of the tailboom, exhibited impact and thermal 
damage. The left side of the cabin was crushed inward towards the center, and the right side 
near the firewall was crushed inward. The rear seat area had minor thermal damage.
The cabin area was crushed and distorted. Both forward seat structures were crushed inward 
and slightly forward. The front of the fuselage was crushed inward and the windshield was 
shattered. First responders cut the left forward seat belts. The right forward seat belts were 
unbuckled.
The top side of the airframe had several disconnects and separations, and was bent to the right 
side. The tail cone separated aft of the number seven bay, and bay numbers 4, 5 and 6 
separated into several sections, consistent with a main rotor strike. The left side of the number 
1, 2 and 3 tail cone bays were flattened inward.
The flight controls had several disconnects between the cyclic/collective and swashplate. All 
fractures exhibited signatures consistent with overload. The tail rotor flight controls had 
several disconnects from the pedals to the tail rotor, and all separations exhibited overload 
signatures.
The fuel tanks remained attached to the airframe. The crossover hose fitting at the main tank 
was separated. The fuel vent hoses pulled apart from vent line fittings. The hoses and lines 
were clear of debris. Both fuel tank skins sustained impact damage, and the bladders remained 
intact. Both fuel caps remained secured to the filler neck.
The empennage was fractured about 32 inches from the tail rotor gearbox mount. The tail rotor 
blades sustained minor impact damage. The tail rotor driveshaft exhibited an impact about 4 
inches from the empennage separation. The curvature of the impact mark was consistent with 
the curvature of the main rotor blade leading edge. The tail rotor drive shaft separated in four 
places. The tail rotor blades exhibited signatures consistent with low rotor RPM at ground 
impact.
The v-belts remained attached to the upper sheave and were split between the vees. The belts 
had thermal damage. The intermediate flex plate was distorted.
The upper sheave forward and aft faces had rotational scoring around the entire circumference. 
The upper frame tubes adjacent to the forward face had scoring running in the direction of 
rotation of the upper sheave. The clutch centering strut had rotational scoring on its forward 
face adjacent to the aft face of the upper sheave running in the direction of rotation. The oil 
cooler had rotational scoring adjacent to the starter ring gear. The alternator cooling fan was 
distorted around its entire circumference.
Page 6 of 10WPR15FA051
The main rotor gearbox (MRGB) separated at the gearbox housing. The MRGB mast tube 
fractured near its midsection. The MRGB drive shaft was bent below the swashplate and bent 
and separated at the teeter stop.
The red blade remained attached to the main rotor hub. The separated sections of the outboard 
end were found in the debris field. The tip cap was broken, with the attachment bolts still 
integral to the main rotor blade. The blade tip and about 43 inches of the leading edge spar 
were found near the beginning of the debris field. Two afterbody sections measuring about 45 
inches in length separated the tip. Gray paint transfer marks, about 2 inches wide and 4 inches 
long, were observed on the upper surface about 25 inches from the tip. The blade spar was bent 
forward about 15° beginning about 54 inches from the tip. The leading edge was damaged 
about 4 ft from the hub. Red transfer marks on the leading edge were found about 42 inches 
from the center of rotation of the blade. The pitch horn separated from the blade grip and the 
fractured surface was consistent with overload. Thread imprints were observed above the pitch 
change link upper rod end. The pitch change link remained attached to the pitch change horn 
and had multiple bends. The counterweights and hardware for the lower red blade pitch 
change link to swashplate attachment was not found. The blade droop stop was bent downward 
and remained attached to the grip.
The blue blade remained attached to the main rotor hub. The tip cap separated from the blade 
and was found in the main wreckage. The blade spar was continuous from the inboard to the 
outboard end. The blade afterbody was fractured from the spar to the tip end to about 72 
inches inboard. The spar was bent opposite the direction of rotation about 72 inches from the 
tip end, bent about 15° aft. The blade afterbody wrinkled aft of the spar attachment area from 
the tip end to 96 inches inboard of the tip end. The blue blade had impact marks on the leading 
edge, about 20 inches from the center of rotation. The curvature of the impact marks was 
consistent with the curvature of damage on the blue blade's pitch horn. The pitch horn was 
fractured at the blade grip, and the fracture surface was consistent with overload. Thread 
imprints were observed on the pitch horn above the pitch change link upper rod end. The 
droop stop was bent downward but remained integral to the grip. The pitch change horn was 
recovered in the debris field. The upper rod end remained attached to the pitch change horn 
but was fractured at the threads beneath the upper rod end bearing. The midsection of the 
pitch change link was recovered loose but was fractured at the pitch change link barrel. The 
lower section of the pitch change link remained attached to the swashplate. The threads 
adjacent to the lower rod end were bent.
The main rotor hub hardware, including the bolts, shims, nuts, and safeties, remained intact. 
The hub exhibited impact marks of the blue blade grip contacting the hub, consistent with 
flapping exceedance. Similar impact marks of less severity were observed on the red blade grip 
side. A small upper section of the main rotor drive shaft remained attached to the hub via the 
teetering bolt. The small upper section separated a few inches below the hub, and was severely 
bent inward on the side of the red blade spindle. Coarse thread imprints were found on the 
lower edge of the hub immediately beneath the red blade coning bolt, consistent with a pitch 
change link. On the upper surface of the hub, adjacent to the teetering bolt on the red blade 
side, an impact mark was consistent with the impact from a pitch change rod link end bearing.
The swashplate red blade pitch change link bolt hole exhibited dark surface markings on the 
outboard edge and about midway down the bore. Thread impact marks were found on the 
Page 7 of 10WPR15FA051
swashplate adjacent to the lower rod end bearing of the blue blade pitch change link 
attachment location.
The landing skids were fractured in multiple locations. The aft crosstube separated from the 
main wreckage. The forward crosstube remained attached to the cabin. Both the forward left 
and aft left struts were bent aft.
The engine remained attached to the fuselage. Thermal damage was noted to the wiring 
harness and ignition leads. The engine was covered in a sooty residue. The firewall and fuel 
pump housing exhibited impact damage. The magneto ignition leads exhibited impact damage 
near the distributer cap, and thermal damage near the cylinders. The lower sparkplugs were 
removed and revealed normal wear conditions with light gray deposits. Two of the spark plugs 
were saturated in oil. The crankshaft was rotated by hand, and cylinder compression was 
obtained. The ignition leads were cut near the thermal damage, and spark was obtained from 
all leads during crankshaft rotation. The magnetos were not removed during the examination. 
Rotational scoring was evident on the fan wheel assembly. The starter ring gear separated from 
the flywheel. The oil pickup screen was removed and was clear of debris. The exhaust assembly 
was crushed upwards.
A detailed report of a follow-up examination is contained in the NTSB public docket.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examinations were performed on the pilot and passenger by the Utah Department 
of Health, Medical Examiner's office. The cause of death for each was reported as total body 
blunt force injuries.
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed forensic toxicology on specimens from 
the pilot. The tests were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, volatiles and tested-for drugs.
TEST AND RESEARCH
The main rotor blades (both inboard sections), hub, upper mast section, upper drive shaft 
section, droop stops (2), yoke, pitch change links (2), main rotor blade pitch change horns (2), 
and swashplate were sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further examination. The 
examination revealed that all fractures were consisted with overstress failure, and no 
preexisting cracking was noted. The examination also revealed that the pitch change link 
attachment hole for the red blade appeared intact and free of damage. The red blade pitch link 
was intact and relatively straight. The counterweights and the lower red blade pitch change link 
attachment hardware were missing. Torque measurements were taken on nuts installed on the 
three recovered pitch change link attachment bolts. The torque values for all three nuts were 
lower than that required by the manufacturer's maintenance manual. A detailed report of the 
examination is contained in the NTSB public docket.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to manufacturer's maintenance instructions, the attachment bolts used at the upper 
and lower ends of the pitch change links are NAS6605 series bolts. The locknuts for the 
Page 8 of 10WPR15FA051
NAS6605 series bolts should be fastened to a dry torque value of 240 lb-in ± 24 lb-in, and 
palnuts used on NAS6605 series bolts should be applied with a dry torque of 20 lb-in to 40 lb-
in. During installation, the palnuts are installed over the top of the locking nut.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Flight control sys malf/fail (Defining event)
Mast bumping
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
65
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Instrument Airplane; Instrument 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5500 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
63
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/26/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 250 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 9 of 10WPR15FA051
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER 
COMPANY
Registration:
N3234U
Model/Series:
R44 II
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
2007
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
11654
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/19/2014, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
582 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-AE1A5
Registered Owner:
NATIVE RANGE CAPTURE 
SERVICES INC
Rated Power:
205 hp
Operator:
Native Range Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSLC, 4227 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
203°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 15000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 19000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
BOUNTIFUL, UT (BTF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Destination: 
BOUNTIFUL, UT (BTF)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
SKYPARK (BTF)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4234 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4700 ft / 70 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Page 10 of 10WPR15FA051
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.857778, -111.923889 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew L Swick
Adopted Date:
04/04/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
David Odekirk; FAA-FSDO; Salt Lake City, UT
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA
Troy Helgeson; Lycoming Engines; Denver, CO
Publish Date:
04/04/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90447
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
