National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Berrien Springs, MI
Accident Number: CHI05CA060
Date & Time: 02/01/2005, 0850 EST
Registration: N9515B
Aircraft: Cessna 172RG
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane, piloted by a private pilot receiving instruction from a certified flight instructor (CFI), sustained substantial damage during a hard landing following a simulated loss of engine power during takeoff and subsequent emergency landing after takeoff.
The pilot's accident report stated, "On climb out, the air speed was held between 63 and 65 knots (Vy).
To simulate an engine failure, the CFI reduced the throttle.
Immediately upon noticing the loss of power, I lowered the nose of the aircraft to avoid loss of airspeed and to avoid a wing stall.
While maintaining control of the aircraft, altitude was lost.
An attempt was made to flare the aircraft before contact with the runway.
Subsequently, a hard landing was made, and the aircraft came to a complete stop on the runway."
The CFI's accident report stated, "We then made a short field takeoff and during the takeoff I simulated an engine failure.
We immediately pushed the nose over but with insufficient airspeed we developed a high sink rate and made a hard landing."
The CFI stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions associated with the airplane during the flight.
The wind was calm.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot not maintaining airspeed leading to an excessive sink rate during a simulated emergency landing after takeoff.
An additional cause was the certified flight instructor's inadequate supervision.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - SIMULATED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) DESCENT - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
