The private pilot stated he was on a night cross country flight at 2,500 feet flight following with 
air traffic control. "All of a sudden the engine started to sputter. I tried the throttle control back 
and forth a few times, then the engine just seemed to run at 700-800 rpm. The throttle 
adjustments didn't make any difference." The airplane started descending rapidly and he made 
a forced landing to a highway.  The right wing of the airplane collided with a tree and the 
ground. When the airplane came to a stop, the pilot noticed the airplane was on fire. The pilot 
was unable to get the passenger out of the airplane and had to exit the airplane due to the fire. 
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, and engine assembly and accessories revealed no 
anomalies.
The partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 2005, at 1857 eastern standard time, a Cessna T210M, C-GVVS, a Canadian 
registered airplane to a private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, collided 
with trees and power lines in the vicinity of Shallotte, North Carolina, during a forced landing. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. A post crash fire 
destroyed the airplane. The private pilot reported minor injuries. The pilot rated passenger was 
fatally injured. The flight originated from Atlantic City, New Jersey, on February 1, 2005, at 
1625.
The pilot stated he was in cruise flight at 2,500 feet flight-following with air traffic control. "All 
of a sudden the engine started to sputter. I tried the throttle control back and forth a few times, 
then the engine just seemed to run at 700-800 rpm. The throttle adjustments didn't make any 
difference." The airplane started descending rapidly. He and the passenger observed a highway 
to their front with a car going in the same direction. He turned on his landing light and lowered 
the landing gear in preparation for a forced landing on the highway. As he was making a "May 
Day" call, he lost sight of the car and the highway. He made a steep turn to the left and 
observed the highway and continued the forced landing. The right wing of the airplane collided 
with a tree and the ground. When the airplane came to a stop, he noticed it was on fire. He was 
unable to get the passenger out of the airplane. He exited the airplane and was subsequently 
transported to a local area hospital. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Review of information on file with the Canadian Transportation Safety Board revealed the pilot 
holds a private pilot certificate for airplane single engine land, night rated, valid until 
November 1, 2007.  The pilot holds a CAT 3 medical issued on October 7, 2002, valid for 5 
years with the restriction, "glasses must be available." The pilot stated he had 350 total flight 
hours with 80 to 90 hours in the Cessna T210M.
Review of information on file with the Canadian Transportation Safety Board revealed the pilot 
rated passenger held a private pilot certificate for airplane single engine land issued in March 
2003. In addition the pilot held a night rating issued in May 2003.  The pilot held a CAT 1 
medical issued in June 2004, with no restrictions. The pilot indicated on his application for the 
medical certificate that he had 25 total flight hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The airplane logbooks were located in the wreckage and were damaged by fire. The last 
recorded 100-hour and annual inspection was conducted on May 15, 2004. The entry states, 
"time since overhaul 934.9." The registered owner stated the engine and airframe had 2,900 
total hours and the airplane had flown 100 hours since the last annual inspection. The actual 
total time was not determined. It could not be determined if Service Bulletin SB95-2 issued by 
Teledyne Continental Motors, Cessna Service Bulletin SEB95-15 and Advisory Circular 20-143 
had been conducted.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Myrtle Beach International Airport, Myrtle Beach, North Carolina, located 28 miles to the 
south-southwest of the mishap site, 1850 surface weather observation was: wind 010 at 8 
knots, visibility 10 miles, 12,000 scattered, temperature 43-degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 
temperature 30-degrees Fahrenheit, and altimeter 30.36. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was located on the east side of North Carolina Highway 130 and adjacent to High 
Hill Drive SW in the vicinity of Shallotte, North Carolina. Examination of the crash site 
revealed the airplane collided with trees and a power line on a heading of 300-degrees 
magnetic. Pieces of the right wing were located in the tree and at the base of the tree 91 feet 6-
inches from the initial point of impact. The right aileron and 5 feet of the wing structure was 
located 154 feet down the crash debris line in the middle of Highway 130. The airplane came to 
rest upright off the east side of Highway 130, 271 feet down the crash debris line on a heading 
251-degrees. The left wing was located18 feet in front of the main wreckage. The crash debris 
line extended 299 feet from the initial point of impact.  
The engine assembly was displaced to the left and the engine assembly remained in the engine 
cradle. The left front engine mount and left and right engine mount were intact. The right front 
engine mount separated from the engine. The upper and lower engine cowlings were crushed 
and received fire damage. The propeller assembly was fire damaged and remained attached to 
the propeller crankshaft flange. The propeller spinner was crushed. Two of the three propeller 
blades were loose in the propeller hub. All three-propeller blades were fire damaged and bent 
aft at mid span. Chord wise scarring was present on two of the propeller blades. The nose gear 
strut was extended and the nose wheel was separated.
The cabin area was consumed by fire from the firewall extending behind the baggage 
compartment door. The left and right fuel header tanks were fire damaged. The seat frames 
and seat rails were consumed in the fire.  The seat belts and shoulder harnesses were reported 
to be in use and were consumed in the fire.  The left and right cabin doors separated from their 
door hinges. The right cabin door handle was in the locked position and the latch pin was 
extended. The left cabin door handle was not located and the latch pin was extended. 
The throttle, propeller, and mixture cables were located in the cockpit area. The propeller cable 
moved freely in the sleeve and the propeller cable remained attached to the propeller governor. 
The throttle cable remained attached to a melted portion of the throttle control arm, and the 
control arm was separated from the spindle. The mixture cable was connected to the mixture 
control arm. The throttle, propeller, and mixture cable were removed and forwarded to the 
NTSB Materials laboratory for further examination. Examination of the rear portions of the 
control cables revealed the post crash fire had consumed all the non-metal parts leaving behind 
the barrels, sleeves, cores, and casings. The identification of the cables from the accident 
airplane were confirmed by the NTSB Laboratory by comparing the remaining metal 
components with the metal components from the exemplar cables provided by the aircraft 
manufacturer. The examination revealed the remaining portions of the control cables 
submitted for further examination were intact prior to impact and that a cutting tool used to 
remove the cables at the accident site had performed the only separation of the cables. 
Examination of the cables showed no evidence of significant wear or any other condition that 
would have affected the functionality of the cables before the post crash fire.
Flight control cable continuity was confirmed for the rudder and elevator from the firewall aft 
to all flight control surfaces. Aileron cable continuity was confirmed from the firewall to the 
turnbuckle and then from the turnbuckle to the ailerons. The left and right main landing gear 
were extended.
The right wing spar received fire damage and remained attached to the carry through spar. The 
carry through spar was resting on the forward cabin area. The inboard 7 feet of the right wing 
was consumed by fire. A 2 feet 6 inch piece of the center wing section was fire damaged and 
was located on top of the separated right cabin door. The right aileron and 5 feet of the right 
wing structure was located 111 feet to the left and rear of the main wreckage. The right main 
fuel tank was consumed by fire. The protruding type fuel cap was in place. The right aileron 
cable was separated at the aileron. The right flap was in the retracted position.
The tail cone was fire damaged from the mid-dorsal fin extending forward. The vertical fin and 
left and right horizontal stabilizers remained attached to the tail cone. The right horizontal 
stabilizer was bent upward. The right elevator remained attached to the horizontal stabilizer by 
the inboard and center hinge. The outboard hinge separated from the horizontal stabilizer. The 
right elevator balance weight was attached. The elevator trim tab actuator measured 1.5 inches 
which equates to a neutral trim tab setting. The leading edge of the left horizontal stabilizer 
was damaged 56 inches outboard of the tail cone. The left elevator and elevator balance weight 
were intact. The vertical stabilizer and rudder were intact. The rudder was crushed forward and 
the rudder balance weight was intact.
The left inboard wing spar remained attached to the carry through spar and was resting on the 
left main landing gear. The left flap actuator jackscrew was exposed 4 ½ inches, which equates 
to flaps in the retracted position. The separated left wing was bent downward at the flap aileron 
junction. The entire wing received fire damage. The upper wing skin was consumed by fire in 
the vicinity of the left main fuel tank. The left main protruding fuel cap was in place. The 
aileron and flap remained attached to the wing. The flap was in the retracted position. One 
aileron cable remained intact with the airframe. The remaining aileron cable separated at the-
wing fuselage junction.
The engine assembly and accessories were fire damaged. The left and right exhaust tubes, and 
muffler were damaged and remained attached to the engine assembly. The left and right 
induction manifolds were intact. The intake air box was crushed forward of the air filter. The 
area in the vicinity of the alternate air door was consumed by fire. 
The waste gate valve was intact and the waste gate controller separated from the turbine side of 
the controller. The compressor side of the turbo charger intake duct was damaged. The waste 
gate plate was in the open position. The throttle body remained attached to the engine and the 
throttle plate was in the open position. The turbo charger was removed and the compressor 
turbine rotated freely when turned by hand. The fuel pump was intact and removed from the 
engine. The fuel pump coupler was intact and the drive gear rotated the fuel pump freely by 
hand. The fuel pump was placed in a solvent tank. The drive gear was turned with a power drill 
and pumping action was confirmed.
The left and right magnetos were intact and received fire damaged. Both magnetos were 
removed from the engine and no spark was obtained at the ignition towers when turned by a 
power drill. Both magnetos were disassembled. The drive gears were fire damaged. The 
ignition harness received fire damage on all ignition leads. The fuel manifold was intact. The 
fuel manifold was disassembled and was free of contaminants. The fuel injector nozzles were 
removed and were not obstructed. The top sparkplugs were removed from all cylinders. The 
No. 1, 3, 2, 4, and 6 spark plugs were "normal wear" when compared to the Champion Aviation 
Check-A-Plug Chart. The No. 5 sparkplug was oil soaked. The lower sparkplugs were removed 
from all cylinders.  The No. 1, 3, 5, 2, 4, and 6 sparkplugs were "normal wear" when compared 
to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug Chart. 
Compression and suction was obtained on all cylinders when the crankshaft was turned by 
hand and continuity was confirmed to the gear and valve drive train. All cylinders were intact 
and not damaged except for the cooling fins on cylinder No. 6. All piston crowns were intact, 
dark in color, with tan carbon deposits. The oil cooler was intact and received fire damage. The 
oil pump and scavenge pump received fire damage and was removed from the engine. The oil 
pump and scavenge pump drive gears rotated freely when rotated by hand. Both pumps were 
disassembled and no scoring was noted on the internal sidewalls. The oil filter was removed 
and the oil filter element was free of contaminants. The oil sump was removed and the oil pick 
up tube and screen were free of debris.
The starter, starter adapter, and alternator were fire damaged and intact. The vacuum pump 
was fire damaged. The vacuum pump drive coupling was melted and could not be rotated by 
hand. The vacuum pump vanes were intact.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
Toxicology specimens from the pilot were not obtained.
The North Carolina State Medical Examiner conducted a postmortem examination of the pilot 
rated passenger on February 2, 2005. The reported cause of death was thermal injuries. 
TEST AND RESEARCH
Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) Service Bulletin SB95-2, Inspection and Maintenance of 
Engine Controls, Cables and Linkage states, "TCM has received reports and examined damaged 
components of fuel systems. These components consist of linkage and levers used on the 
throttle and fuel control, fuel pumps, carburetors and related assemblies. Our examination 
revealed that this damage is caused by lack of lubrication and/or improper installation or 
maintenance of these components." 
The Service Bulletin states in a warning, "FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE INSTRUCTIONS 
SET FORTH IN THIS SERVICE BULLETIN CAN RESULT IN FUEL SYSTEM LINKAGE 
AND/OR RELATED COMPONENT DAMAGE AND SUBSEQUENT LOSS OF ENGINE 
POWER."
The inspection procedure in the Service Bulletin states the following:
"1. Inspect the operation of each engine related control, including the throttle, mixture, 
propeller, carburetor heat and alternate air controls as applicable. Make certain that each 
control has full limit of travel and that no binding or excessive play caused by worn parts or 
improper installation is evident.
2. Inspect all engine control cables for proper routing and security as specified in the applicable 
airframe manufacturer's instructions. Inspect cables for signs of damage or wear that can be 
caused by chafing and heat distress."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The throttle cable, propeller cable, mixture cable, throttle body, and aircraft wreckage were 
released to Atlanta Air Recovery, Griffin, Georgia, on July 20, 2005.T
