The airplane collided with the terrain following a loss of directional control after touchdown.  
The pilot reported that after touching down, as the airplane slowed, it began turning to the 
right.  The pilot stated he already had left aileron and rudder applied because there was a slight 
crosswind.  However, he applied more aileron and rudder but the turn became more severe.  
He stated he tried the left brake to no avail.  He stated the airplane was veering about 30 
degrees off the runway centerline and he applied right brake to try and slow the airplane.  The 
pilot stated the airplane began to skid as it traveled to the side of the runway at a speed of 35 to 
40 knots.  The pilot stated the airplane tipped to the left when it contacted the slushy grass.  
The left wing and left horizontal stabilizer contacted the ground prior to the airplane settling 
back on the main gear.  The pilot stated the airplane continued to turn until it came to rest 
facing the runway.  Post accident inspection of the airplane revealed the tail wheel steering 
pawl was worn to the point that it would not sufficiently lock the locking collar allowing the tail 
wheel to castor on landing.
A failure of the tail wheel locking mechanism which resulted in the pilot's inability to maintain 
directional control of the airplane during the landing roll.
On February 3, 2005, at 1500 central standard time, a Cessna A185F, N1767R, collided with the 
terrain following a loss of directional control, while landing on runway 36 (4,855 feet by 100 
feet, dry asphalt) at the Anoka County-Blaine Airport (ANE), Minneapolis, Minnesota.  The 
private pilot was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The 
flight originated from the Konshok Airport (PKD), Park Rapids, Minnesota, at 1350.  
The pilot reported that after touching down he raised the flaps to put more weight on the 
aircraft wheels.  He stated that as the airplane slowed, it began turning to the right.  The pilot 
stated he already had left aileron and rudder applied because there was a slight crosswind.  
However, he applied more aileron and rudder but the turn became more severe.  He stated he 
tried the left brake to no avail.  He stated the airplane was veering about 30 degrees off the 
runway centerline and he applied right brake to try and slow the airplane.  The pilot stated the 
airplane began to skid as it traveled to the side of the runway at a speed of 35 to 40 knots.  The 
pilot stated the airplane tipped to the left when it contacted the slushy grass.  The left wing and 
left horizontal stabilizer contacted the ground prior to the airplane settling back on the main 
gear.  The pilot stated the airplane continued to turn until it came to rest facing the runway.  
The pilot stated he purchased the airplane in December 2004, and flew it for the first time 
during the week prior to the accident.  His first flight consisted of five full stop landings with an 
instructor.  He stated that both he and the instructor noted that the airplane was not taxiing 
right and that the left brake felt "soft."  He stated he flew the airplane to ANE and on February 
1, 2005, he made six full stop landings in the airplane at ANE.  The pilot stated that the 
airplane was not handling "perfect" during this flight, but that it was "OK."  The pilot stated 
that on the following day he flew the airplane back to PKD with a list of discrepancies that 
needed to be fixed.  He stated the brakes were on the list.  He stated that when he landed PKD 
the left brake was not working and the airplane veered on the runway coming to rest facing the 
runway edge.  
The pilot stated that following the maintenance he taxied and test flew the airplane, and the 
brakes functioned properly.  It was on his return flight back to ANE following the maintenance 
that the accident occurred.
Post accident inspection of the airplane was conducted by an inspector from the Federal 
Aviation Administration Flight Standards District Office in Minneapolis, Minnesota.  The 
inspector reported the tail wheel steering pawl was worn to the point that it would not 
sufficiently lock the locking collar allowing the tail wheel to castor on landing.
