The airplane experienced a nose gear collapse during a precautionary landing in a corn field.  
The student pilot stated that her radios became inoperative during the second leg of the solo 
cross country flight.  She elected to bypass the airport she intended on landing at to return to 
her home airport.  During the flight to her home airport, the pilot noticed that the fuel gauges 
were indicating empty.  She stated the airplane was topped off at her last departure point so 
she should have had plenty of fuel, but she thought the airplane was possibly leaking fuel so 
she decided to land at a nearby airport.  The pilot stated she lowered the flaps while in the 
traffic pattern, but she doesn't remember the flaps extending.  She stated that as she tried to 
turn onto final approach, the airplane would not bank and the controls felt sluggish.  The pilot 
stated she knew she was not going to make it to the runway so she located a field in which to 
land.  The pilot stated she reduced the power to idle at which time the stall warning sounded so 
she lowered the nose of the airplane.  She stated the field had a slight rise so she held the 
airplane off the ground as long as possible.  The nose gear contacted snow during the landing 
and the nose gear collapsed.  Post accident inspection of the airplane revealed corrosion was 
present at the wiring connectors on the master switch.  The fuel gauges, radios, and flaps, are 
electrically actuated components.  The flight controls were inspected and control continuity 
was established.
The pilot's failure to identify the electrical system failure and to maintain adequate airspeed 
during the landing approach.  Factors associated with the accident were the electrical system 
failure, the snow covered terrain, and the pilot's lack of experience.
On February 3, 2005, at 1500 central standard time, a Cessna 152, N68714, experienced a nose 
gear collapse during a precautionary landing in a field in Sturtevant, Wisconsin.  The student 
pilot was not injured.  The airplane received substantial damage.  The 14 CFR Part 91 solo 
instructional flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions and a visual flight rules 
flight plan was filed.  The flight departed from the Rock County Airport (JVL), Janesville, 
Wisconsin, at 1255, with an intended destination of Witmann Regional Airport (OSH), 
Oshkosh, Wisconsin. 
The pilot stated the accident occurred during a solo cross county flight.  She stated the flight 
was planned from the Waukegan Regional Airport (UGN), Waukegan, Illinois, to JVL, to OSH, 
then back to UGN.  She stated she flew uneventfully to JVL where she topped off the airplane 
with 26 gallons of fuel.  The pilot stated that approximately 15 to 20 minutes after departing 
JVL, she dialed in the OSH very high frequency omnirange navigational equipment (VOR), but 
was unable to pick up a signal.  She stated she then tried to listen to the OSH automated 
terminal information service (ATIS), at which time she realized that the aircraft radios were 
not working.  The pilot stated since OSH was a controlled field she decided to return to UNG.  
The pilot stated she was over Fond Du Lac, Wisconsin, when she made this decision.  She 
stated she turned south and flew west of Milwaukee at 2,000 feet mean sea level (msl) and 
then turned to follow the highway to UGN.  The pilot stated she used her cell phone and left 
messages with her instructor and the flying club chief pilot to inform the air traffic control 
tower at UNG that she would be coming in without radio contact.  She stated she then noticed 
that the fuel gauges were indicating that the fuel tanks were empty.  The pilot stated she knew 
the airplane should have had plenty of fuel, but she thought that maybe a fuel cap was left off 
when the airplane was fueled or that the airplane was losing fuel for some other reason.  She 
stated she started looking for a field in which to land when she realized that the Sylvania 
Airport (C89) was about 2 miles in front of her.  The pilot stated that at this time she did not 
realize that there was a problem with the electrical system.
The pilot stated she was too high and fast to make a straight in approach to land on runway 28, 
so she decided to enter a right downwind for runway 08.  She stated she lowered the flap 
handle while in the traffic pattern, but she didn't remember seeing the flaps extend nor did she 
remember feeling the drag of the flaps extending.  The pilot stated she was at an altitude of 
about 500 feet at and airspeed of 70 knots while on base.  She stated, "As I turned to enter 
final, the plane would not bank, although it did yaw slightly to the right, it felt sluggish as if I 
was going to stall - but my speed was above stall speed at that point."  She stated she knew she 
was not going to make it to the runway so she located a cornfield in which to land.  The pilot 
stated she reduced the power to idle at which time the stall warning sounded so she lowered 
the nose of the airplane.  She stated the field had a slight rise so she held the airplane off the 
ground as long as possible.  The nose gear contacted snow during the landing, and the nose 
gear collapsed.  
Post accident inspection of the airplane was conducted by inspectors from the Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards District Office.  The inspection 
revealed an intermittent connection of the spade terminals on the "Battery Master/Alternator 
switch prevented the battery contactor relay from closing.  This prevented power to the 
electrical bus and the alternator field circuit.  The spade connectors had a good physical 
connection, but poor electrical connection due to the dull white appearance of the connectors.  
When the wire bundle at the switch was moved slightly, the battery relay opened and closed 
intermittently.  The connectors were removed from the switch terminals, slightly cleaned and 
re-connected.  The intermittent operation ceased.  
The fuel gauges, radios, and flaps, are electrically actuated components.  The flight controls 
were inspected and control continuity was established.
