The pilot said that he was descending into the traffic pattern after canceling his instrument 
flight rules clearance and that he lowered the landing gear; however, there was no response. At 
that point, he reset the landing gear circuit breaker and tried again to no avail. He then used 
the emergency checklist and attempted to drop the gear. Again there was no response. He 
continued to repeat all procedures for about the next 1 1/2 hours until the airplane was at 
minimum fuel and he was forced to land with the landing gear retracted. Prior to landing, he 
secured all items in the cabin, feathered the propeller, and shut down the engine and all 
electrical and fuel controls. The airplane touched down mid-field and slid about 1,200 feet. 
During the postaccident examination, the airplane was placed on jacks and supplied electrical 
power. Both the normal and emergency extension landing gear systems did not work. The 
examination revealed that a faulty low hydraulic pressure switch prevented the normal gear 
extension system from operating properly. The examination also revealed that the emergency 
gear release valve™s control arm was misrigged and would only move 1/4 inch instead of the 
approximately 2 inches of movement that was required. The misrigged control arm would not 
allow the system to port hydraulic fluid from the gear-down line to the gear-up line, which is 
required for the fluid to return to the reservoir and to allow gravity to extend the gear.
The failure of the low pressure switch in the normal landing gear system, which prevented 
normal operation of that system, and the misrigging of the emergency extension gear release 
valve, which prevented the system from being depressurized to allow for the freefall of the gear.
On June 2, 2011, about 1300 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-46-310P, N712MK, 
experienced a landing gear extension system failure during approach to the Lake Havasu City 
Airport, Lake Havasu City, Arizona. The airplane was substantially damaged as it slid to a stop 
on the runway. Neither the airline transport pilot nor passenger was injured. The airplane was 
registered to Sea Air Holdings, LLC. The personal flight was operated under the provisions of 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an 
instrument flight plan was filed. The flight originated from Portland, Oregon, about 0830.
The pilot said that he was descending into the traffic pattern after canceling his IFR clearance 
and he attempted to lower the landing gear. There was no response. At that point he reset the 
landing gear circuit breaker and tried again to no avail. He then went to the emergency check 
list and attempted to drop the gear. Again there was no response.  He continued to repeat all 
procedures for approximately the next 1 1/2 hours until he was at minimum fuel and was 
forced to land gear up. Prior to landing he located his passenger in the right rear seat, secured 
all items in the cabin, feathered and shut down the  engine, and all electrical and fuel controls. 
The aircraft touched down at mid field and slid about 1200 feet. 
Examination of the airframe revealed that a lower fuselage bulkhead was ground down. 
A Federal Aviaiton Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector examined the airplane's 
landing gear system following recovery from the runway.  The aircraft was placed on jacks and 
electrical power was supplied to the airplane.  Both the normal and emergency extension 
landing gear systems did not work.  The landing gear was lowered by bleeding pressure out of 
gear up line fitting on the nose gear sequence valve.  The Emergency Gear Release valve, P/N 
85124-02, was manually operated at the valve.  Its control arm would only move 1/4-inch 
instead of the approximately 2 inches of movement it should have.  It would not port fluid from 
the gear down line to the gear up line, which is its required function to allow hydraulic fluid to 
return through the up line to the reservoir and allowing gravity to extend the gear.
The cause of the failure of the normal gear extension system was traced to a faulty low pressure 
switch.
