The pilots reported that they felt one brake pedal fully release and then reapply during the 
landing roll. Air traffic control tower personnel saw a puff of smoke and asked the flight crew if 
a tire had blown on landing. The pilots taxied the airplane to a hold pad for further 
examination; however, the emergency brake would not hold the airplane stationary. The pilots 
also received caution messages for the brakes, and hydraulic fluid was observed on the tires 
and ground. An examination revealed the brake pressure plate and rotor failed. Separated 
brake parts were also found on the landing runway. Further examination of the incident brake 
and four other brakes revealed that they all contained varying levels of oxidation development. 
The brake manufacturer had previously provided the operator with a maintenance procedure 
which involved using a fingernail or a specified plastic tool to check brakes for oxidation. The 
operator developed and provided related training to its maintenance personnel based on the 
manufacturer's procedures. However, interviews with airline and contract maintenance 
personnel revealed that they were not familiar with the inspection and were not issued the 
plastic tool. Subsequently, the brake manufacturer and operator provided additional related 
training to the operator's maintenance personnel, and the operator stocked their maintenance 
system with the specified tool.
The overheat and failure the brake during landing due to oxidation of the brake rotors, which 
went undetected by maintenance personnel. Contributing to the accident was maintenance 
personnel™s lack of familiarity with detailed brake oxidation inspection procedures.
On June 3, 2011, about 0605 central daylight time, an Embraer EMB-145, N607AE, sustained 
no damage when its No. three brake overheated and parts of the brake separated during 
landing on runway 22R (7,500 feet by 150 feet, grooved asphalt) at the Chicago O'Hare 
International Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois. The 2 pilots, 1 flight attendant, and 49 
passengers were uninjured. The airplane was registered to and operated by American Eagle 
Airlines as flight 4176, which was a scheduled domestic passenger flight conducted under 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 121. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, 
which operated on an activated instrument flight rules flight plan. The flight originated from 
the Port Columbus International Airport, near Columbus, Ohio, about 0512, and was destined 
for ORD.
According to the operator, during landing roll out and while transferring aircraft controls, the 
flight crew reported the sensation of having one brake pedal fully released then reapplied. The 
airplane cleared runway 22R and the air traffic control tower controller issued clearance to 
cross runway 9R and a further left turn on taxiway H. On taxiway H, the tower controller asked 
if a tire was blown on landing. The tower controller stated that a puff of smoke was seen during 
rollout. 
Braking action diminished as the taxi progressed. The airplane was taxied to and stopped on 
the 32R pad for inspection. When stopped on the pad, it was discovered that emergency brake 
would not hold the aircraft stationary. The flight crew started getting caution messages 
pertaining to brake degrade including hydraulic system two failure and system two hydraulic 
pump fail. The flight attendant advised the flight crew that passengers reported seeing smoke 
on the right side of the aircraft. The flight crew started the auxiliary power unit and shut down 
both engines. The captain opened the service door and saw hydraulic fluid on the tires and the 
ground.
Airport rescue and fire fighting personnel arrived, inspected the main landing gear, and 
decided to have aircraft towed to gate. The passengers were deplaned via stairs and were bused 
to terminal.
The operator™s maintenance personnel inspected the brakes and found a pressure plate and 
rotor failure.
Airport operations supervisors inspected the runway and recovered separated brake parts from 
runway 22R just south of its taxiway Uniform intersection.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane and separated brake 
parts on-scene. Observation and images of the No. three brake, part number 2-1707, revealed 
that parts of it disintegrated and separated. The operator quarantined and shipped the incident 
brake, separated parts, and the No. two brake to the brake manufacturer for detailed 
examinations. The No two brake was installed on the incident airplane about the same time as 
the incident brake was installed on it., 
The operator downloaded a data file from the flight data recorder (FDR) and sent it to the 
National Transportation Safety Board™s Vehicle Recorder Division for decoding. The FDR data 
showed that during landing, the air-ground switch parameter first recorded a ground 
indication at 0603:58 at an indicated airspeed of 132 knots. The air-ground switch parameter 
then showed an additional air indication for 2 seconds before recording a ground indication 
again. At this time, the recorded brake pressure values for the No. one and three brake systems 
were increasing and they reached peak values of 1,426 and 1,534 psi respectively in less than 10 
seconds. A maximum longitudinal deceleration value of -.39 g™s was reached at 0604:10. The 
No. three brake pressure value then decreased to a nominal value and remained there for the 
remainder of the recording.
The two brakes from the incident airplane were shipped to the Goodrich Aircraft Wheel and 
Brake Facility, near Troy, Ohio. Brakes from three additional occurrences were collected and 
also sent for examination: the brake from the No. three position on N724AE, the brake from 
the No. three position on N812AE, and the brake from the No. four position on N630AE. A 
representative from the brake manufacturer examined the brakes using a specified plastic 
probing tool and published procedures for a detailed visual inspection (DVI), which checks for 
oxidation. Two Goodrich brake inspection service bulletins (SB 1063 and SB 1064) were 
released in September 2008, followed by the release of a brake inspection service letter (SL 
2087) in April 2009. Using the visual inspection procedures and tool, the examination revealed 
that all brakes contained varying levels of oxidation development.
According to an operator™s safety representative, Goodrich provided training material to the 
operator™s training department for brake oxidation course development. The operator 
developed Brake Oxidation Training courses I0462 and I0462_11 in 2009. These courses were 
loaded into all airplane mechanics required training folders on 24 June 2009. All mechanics 
were required to complete the web base training within 30 days. Completion of training is 
electronically monitored by the employee™s supervisor to ensure training is/was completed. 
The representative reported that the visual brake inspection alone was never suggested and 
that these training courses derived from the Goodrich material stated that the use of a sharp 
plastic pick or a fingernail to check the carbon disk was the indicated method for oxidation 
detection. 
A FAA inspector assigned to the operator™s certificate management office was asked to conduct 
interviews with the mechanics and inspectors that were involved with the five aircraft brake 
failures to verify what procedures were being used during wheel removal and replacements. On 
June 21, 2011, the operator submitted a revision for a Main Landing Gear Wheel Assembly-
Removal and Installation work card, which incorporated details of the DVI requirement into 
the work card. On June 30, 2011, the operator received the first batch of brake inspection 
scribes that are specified in the detailed inspection.
On June 27, 2011, a mechanic who worked at the operator™s Dallas/Ft. Worth maintenance 
facility was asked if he visually inspected a brake on N630AE in accordance with the DVI and 
he indicated that he did not. He stated that he had not received any training on the inspection 
and was not aware of the special tool for the inspection. The facility did not have the plastic 
probe.
On June 28, 2011, a mechanic who worked at the operator™s Dallas/Ft. Worth maintenance 
facility was asked if he visually inspected a brake on N812AE in accordance with the DVI and 
he indicated that he did not. He stated that he had not received any training on the inspection 
and was not aware of the special tool for the inspection. The facility did not have the plastic 
probe.
On July 28, 2011, a mechanic who worked at the operator™s Raleigh/Durham International 
Airport maintenance facility was asked if he visually inspected a brake on N724AE in 
accordance with the DVI and he indicated that he did not remember. He stated that he had not 
received any training on the inspection and was not aware of the special tool for the inspection 
and used a screwdriver to inspect the brake. The facility did not have the plastic probe.
On August 1, 2011, a mechanic who worked at a contractor™s maintenance facility near Savoy, 
Illinois, was asked if he visually inspected a brake on N607AE and he indicated that he thought 
he did. He stated that he had not received any training on the inspection and was not aware of 
the special tool for the inspection and used his fingernail to inspect the brake. The facility did 
not have the plastic probe.
On August 2, 2011, a mechanic who worked at a contractor™s maintenance facility near 
Erlanger, Kentucky, was asked if he visually inspected a brake on N607AE and he indicated 
that he thought he did. He stated that he had not received any training on the inspection and 
was not aware of the special tool for the inspection. He indicated that he used a hyperlink, 
which he thought took him to the correct inspection. The hyperlink took him to the general 
visual inspection. The facility did not have the plastic probe.
Between July 06, and July 12, 2011, the operator and brake manufacturer conducted formal 
training of the DVI inspection at four of the operator™s main maintenance base locations. The 
operator has added a computer based training course that incorporates the DVI into recurrent 
training for their maintenance technicians.
On August 12, 2011, the operator issued a revised Main Landing Gear Wheel Assembly-
Removal and Installation work card that clarifies the DVI requirement.
According to the operator™s safety representative, as a result of the brake separation incident 
the training courses I0462 and I0462_11 were re-loaded for all mechanics in August 2011. 
Within 30 days 3,089 airplane mechanics had completed the web based training. The 
requirement for the use of a plastic pick or a finger nail during the brake inspection process did 
not changed from the original courses. Plastic picks were bought for the operator™s entire 
maintenance system in late June 2011. The representative indicated that during the new hires 
indoctrination training, time is set aside daily to allow the employee time to do the required 
web based training and the required documentation of the completed training.
