The pilot of the glider was receiving a biennial flight review from a flight instructor. They 
completed two uneventful flights prior to the accident flight. According the flight instructor, 
during the third flight, with the pilot under evaluation at the controls, the glider was 
approximately 500 feet above the ground, 2,000 feet from the end of the turf runway, and 
slightly slow in the flight instructor's judgment. To correct for the airspeed deficiency, the flight 
instructor manipulated the flight controls forward and told the pilot to increase the airspeed 
due to the strong headwind. According to the pilot, the airspeed varied 15 mph during the 
approach and the glider was descending fast, when he relinquished control of the glider to the 
flight instructor. The flight instructor stated that he did not assume control of glider, which was 
abnormally low but still within a good safety margin to land, in his judgment. About 200 feet 
above ground level, the glider encountered a downdraft for approximately four seconds. Then, 
when the glider was 75 feet above ground level, it banked violently to the right. The glider 
impacted trees, a berm, and a guard rail resulting in substantial damage to the fuselage and 
empennage. The flight instructor further stated that he never had any doubt that the pilot was 
in control of the glider, while the pilot under evaluation asserted the instructor stated he had 
control after the plane began a rapid descent on final approach. Both pilots reported there were 
no preexisting mechanical anomalies with the glider. The wind reported at an airport 10 miles 
to the southeast of the accident location was from 220 degrees 14 knots gusting to 21 knots.
The flying pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control and the flight instructor's inadequate 
supervision while landing with a gusting wind. Contributing to the accident was the lack of 
communication between the flight instructor and pilot under evaluation regarding who was 
manipulating the controls.
