National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Uvalde, TX
Incident Number: DFW08IA126
Date & Time: 05/01/2008, 1530 CDT
Registration: N603JS
Aircraft: 2007 Savage Air LLC EPIC LT
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event: Landing gear collapse
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot completed an uneventful normal landing after an approximate 45 minute instrument flight rules cross country flight.
While making a right turn to clear the runway the left main landing gear collapsed.
An on scene investigation was conducted by a Federal Aviation Administration Air Safety Inspector and it was determined that the damage to the landing gear and supporting structure was minor.
There was minimal surface damage to the wings and flight control surfaces.
Tire skid marks that matched the width of the main gear and followed the path of the airplane was consistent with initiating a turn at high speed.
The pilot and his three passengers were not injured and exited the airplane unassisted.
Findings Aircraft Main landing gear attach sec - Failure Factual Information The pilot completed an uneventful normal landing after an approximate 45 minute instrument flight rules cross country flight.
While making a right turn to clear the runway the left main landing gear collapsed.
An on scene investigation was conducted by a Federal Aviation Administration Air Safety Inspector and it was determined that the damage to the landing gear and supporting structure was minor.
There was minimal surface damage to the wings and flight control surfaces.
Tire skid marks that matched the width of the main gear and followed the path of the airplane was consistent with initiating a turn at high speed.
The pilot and his three passengers were not injured and exited the airplane unassisted.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
