National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Prescott, AZ
Accident Number: LAX08CA126
Date & Time: 05/01/2008, 1830 MST
Registration: N331MD
Aircraft: Robinson R22 Beta II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis This was the certificated flight instructor's (CFI) first instructional flight with this new primary student.
They did a preflight inspection of the helicopter together, and departed for the practice area.
Once the student had a general understanding of the controls, they did an approach to a point on the ground that terminated in a hover.
The CFI was letting the student manipulate the controls more and more during the hover.
The CFI positioned the helicopter for a slight right quartering headwind to compensate for translating tendencies.
During hover, the helicopter exhibited a pendulum oscillation that is common for new students learning to hover.
During one of the right lateral oscillations, the helicopter unexpectedly lost altitude.
The right skid contacted the ground, and the helicopter rolled onto its right side.
Within seconds, it caught on fire.
Both pilots exited immediately.
The CFI stated that the airplane and engine had no mechanical failures or malfunctions during the flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The instructor's inadequate supervision and delayed remedial action that resulted in ground contact and a rollover.
: 1370 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 6129 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: O-360-J2A Registered Owner: Guidance Helicopters, Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
