Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Matinicus Islnd, ME
Incident Number:
NYC06IA226
Date & Time:
09/01/2006, 1230 EDT 
Registration:
N8411Q
Aircraft:
Cessna 206F
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
After engine start, the pilot heard "an abnormal engine mechanical noise."  He shut down the 
engine and requested a mechanic.  During a subsequent engine start, the mechanic confirmed 
the mechanical engine noise, and the engine was again shut down.  Hand propping revealed 
that the engine would sometimes "mechanically jam," and further examination revealed the 
fracture of two crankshaft gear teeth.  Both gear teeth exhibited signatures consistent with 
overload.  Corresponding starter adapter gear teeth, that would have meshed with the 
crankshaft gear teeth during the startup, were cracked on the loaded side.  All evaluated 
metallurgical requirements were met, including core hardness, surface hardness and case 
depth.  Although a single "kick back" while cranking could cause the failure of components of 
the cranking system, there was no evidence as to why a kick back may have occurred.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
An engine kick back of undetermined origin during engine start.
Findings
Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER
Phase of Operation: STANDING - STARTING ENGINE(S)
Findings
1. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,ENGINE - FRACTURED
2. REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
Page 2 of 5NYC06IA226
Factual Information
On September 1, 2006, about 1230 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 206F, N8411Q, operated by 
Waters Aero Marine, incurred minor damage during an engine start at Matinicus Island 
Airport (35ME), Matinicus Island, Maine.  The certificated airline transport pilot and the two 
passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The on-demand air 
taxi flight was operating on a company visual flight rules flight plan to Knox County Airport 
(RKD), Owls Head, Maine, under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.
According to the pilot, as soon as the engine began idling after start, he heard "an abnormal 
engine mechanical noise."  He then shut down the engine and requested a mechanic.
During a subsequent engine start, the mechanic confirmed the mechanical engine noise, and 
the engine was again shut down.  Hand propping revealed that the engine would sometimes 
"mechanically jam," and that the alternator drive pulley would turn freely at various points 
during engine rotation.  Further examination revealed a damaged crankshaft gear with two 
teeth missing, and an "abnormal wear groove on an adjoining third tooth."
The Teledyne Continental IO-520-series engine was forwarded to the manufacturer for a 
teardown examination under National Transportation Safety Board oversight.  Aside from the 
missing crankshaft gear teeth, no other gear damage was noted.  The oil sump was removed 
and the two crankshaft gear teeth were recovered.  The oil sump did not contain any additional 
debris or foreign material.
Magneto timing was found to be 25 degrees before top dead center on the left and 23 degrees 
before top dead center on the right.  Both magnetos exhibited normal impulse coupling 
engagement when rotated in the normal direction of rotation.  Installation of the magnetos on 
a test bench revealed that the left magneto impulse coupling would disengage at 350 rpm and 
the right magneto impulse coupling would disengage at 360 rpm.
A metallurgical examination of the crankshaft gear, the starter adapter gear, and the two 
fractured crankshaft gear teeth was performed by the engine manufacturer.  According to the 
manufacturer's report, all evaluated metallurgical requirements were met, including core 
hardness, surface hardness, and case depth.  Both crankshaft gear teeth exhibited signatures 
consistent with overload.  Corresponding starter adapter gear teeth, that would have meshed 
with the crankshaft gear teeth during startup, exhibited "fine" cracking on the loaded side.
Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) Mandatory Service Bulletin MSB94-8C required that 
magneto timing be performed in accordance with manufacturer instructions every 100 hours.  
It also noted: "CAUTION: A single 'kick back' while cranking can cause failure of components 
of the cranking system.  Kick back can be caused by intermittent operation of the impulse 
couplings."  The Bulletin also noted that for the IO-520-series engine, both magnetos should be 
set at 22 degrees before top dead center.  
The engine had 167 hours since rebuild by TCM, and 10 hours since the annual/100 hour 
inspection.
No additional information was available to determine if any maintenance or pilot actions might 
have resulted in a kick back.
Page 3 of 5NYC06IA226
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2005
Flight Time:
9000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 8500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 184 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 71 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N8411Q
Model/Series:
206F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
U206F03271
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2006, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7198 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-F
Registered Owner:
Telford Aviation, Inc.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Waters Aero-Marine
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Penobscot Island Air
Operator Designator Code:
Page 4 of 5NYC06IA226
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Maticus Island, ME (45ME)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Owls Head, ME (RKD)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Matinicus Island Airport (35ME)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.873333, -68.894722
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
02/28/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Edward F Angelo; FAA/FSDO; Portland, ME
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5NYC06IA226
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
