National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Conroe, TX
Accident Number: CEN12TA122
Date & Time: 01/03/2012, 2145 CST
Registration: N54872
Aircraft: CESSNA 172P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision during takeoff/land
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Public Aircraft
 Analysis The airplane was at 1,600 feet mean sea level with the engine power set at 2,300 rpm.
When the airplane was about 6 miles from the airport, the pilot heard a loud ﬁboomﬂ and the engine lost all power.
The pilot did not have sufficient altitude to glide to the airport, so he landed the airplane on a street.
When the airplane was on final approach to land, it collided with power lines.
The pilot was able to land the airplane, but was forced to swerve to the right to avoid oncoming traffic.
The right wing struck a utility pole, which resulted in substantial damage.
A postaccident engine examination revealed that when the crankshaft was turned, there was no movement of the intake or exhaust valves or magneto gears.
The rear crank gear bolt was loose and the gear dowel pin was sheared, which would cause the camshaft and rear accessory gears to stop turning.
Metallurgical examination revealed beach markings at the aft end of the crankshaft approximately in plane with the aft face of the crankshaft where it mated to the crankshaft gear.
There was fretting damage on the crankshaft gear, wear on the dowel pins, and wear on the lock washer, indicative of movement as a result of insufficient clamping force from the attachment bolt at the time of installation.
The engine had accrued 752 hours since it was overhauled in August 2007.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Failure of the rear crankshaft gear dowel pin due to improper installation, which resulted in a total loss of engine power.
The pilot, the sole occupant on board, was not injured.
The public use airplane was substantially damaged.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the Civil Air Patrol (CAP), Maxwell AFB, Alabama, as CAP flight 4272.
Dark night visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the accident, and a company flight plan had been filed.
The flight originated from the West Houston Airport (KIWS), Houston, Texas, approximately 2120, and was en route to Lone Star Executive Airport (KCXO), Conroe, Texas.
According to the pilot™s statement, engine power was set at 2300 rpm (revolutions per minute) and the airplane was at 1,600 feet msl (mean sea level).
When the airplane was about 6 miles from the destination airport, the pilot heard a loud ﬁboomﬂ and the engine lost all power.
The pilot did not have sufficient altitude to glide to the airport and landed on Highway 105 and North 6th Street in Conroe, Texas.
When the airplane was on final approach, it collided with power lines.
The pilot was able to land the airplane, but was forced to swerve to the right to avoid oncoming traffic.
The airplane struck a curb and spun around.
The right wing struck a utility pole, resulting in substantial damage.
On January 24, the engine was disassembled and examined under the direction of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector at the facilities of Fritz Aviation in Fredericksburg, Texas.
CAP records indicate the engine had accrued 752 hours since it was overhauled in August 2007.
When the crankshaft was turned, no movement of the intake or exhaust valves or magneto gears was observed.
Upon removal of the rear accessory case, it was discovered that the rear crank gear bolt was loose and the gear dowel pin (part number STD 1065) was sheared.
According to the FAA inspector, there was a line on the dowel pin, similar to a pre- existing crack.
According to the attending mechanic™s report, the sheared dowel pin would cause the camshaft and rear accessory gears to stop turning.
The crankshaft gear, attachment bolt, and crankshaft dowel pin were submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board™s Materials Laboratory for examination.
According their report, the dowel pin was fractured from the aft end of the crankshaft approximately in plane with the aft face of the crankshaft where it mated to the crankshaft gear.
Magnified optical examination of the dowel pin fracture revealed a relatively flat transverse fracture with beach markings indicative of fatigue progression initiating at two locations on opposing sides on the outer diameter of the dowel pin.
The fatigue region emanating from the origin area (primary origin area) was substantially larger than that emanating from the upper side.
The cylinder faces of the dowel pin appeared relatively smooth and reflective consistent with wear of the original surfaces.
The wear was present around most of the dowel pin periphery.
The dowel pin™s diameter was reduced an estimated 0.005 inch by wear adjacent to the fatigue origin leaving a visible step.
The crankshaft gear exhibited fretting damage on the forward face consistent with relative motion at the gear-to-crankshaft interface.
The lock washer on the aft side of the crankshaft gear showed wear damage corresponding to contact with the underside of the attachment bolt head.
: 2550 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 89 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4757 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-360-A4M Registered Owner: CIVIL AIR PATROL, INC.
