This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Mount Pleasant, TN
Accident Number: ERA18LA241
Date & Time: 09/01/2018, 1715 CDT
Registration: N388MA
Aircraft: Diamond DA40
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On September 1, 2018, about 1715 central daylight time, a Diamond Aircraft DA 40, N388MA, 
operated by the private pilot, was substantially damaged during a forced landing to a field, 
following a total loss of engine power during approach to Maury County Airport (MRC), Mount 
Pleasant, Tennessee. The private pilot was seriously injured. The personal flight was conducted 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight that departed MRC about 
1615.
The pilot reported that after flying over the local area for approximately 40 minutes, he 
returned to MRC and entered the airport traffic pattern for landing on runway 6. While on a 
downwind leg of the airport traffic pattern, he reduced the engine power in preparation for 
landing; however, the engine lost all power. The pilot then advanced the throttle in 
unsuccessful attempt to regain power. He subsequently attempted an engine restart with no 
success and at that time realized that the airplane would not be able to glide to the runway. The 
pilot then performed a forced landing to a field about 1 mile prior to the runway 6 threshold.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that 
during the landing, the nose landing gear and left main landing gear collapsed, and the 
empennage separated from the airframe. The inspector added that although there was some 
damage to the wings, their respective fuel tank remained intact. He drained approximately 5 
gallons of fuel from the left main tank and 10 to 11 gallons of fuel from the right main fuel tank. 
The fuel was 100-low-lead aviation fuel and appeared bright, clear, and absent of any visible 
contamination. Additionally, the fuel selector was found positioned to the right main fuel tank 
prior to being moved to the off position by rescue personnel. The wreckage was retained for 
further examination and an engine test-run.
The four-seat, low-wing, fixed tricycle-gear airplane, was manufactured in 2005. It was 
powered by a Lycoming IO-360-M1A, 180-horsepower engine, equipped with a constant-
speed, two-blade Hartzell propeller. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was 
completed on January 9, 2018. At that time, the airframe and engine had accrued 1,346 hours 
since new. The airplane flew an additional 40 hours from the time of the most recent 
inspection, until the accident.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Diamond
Registration: N388MA
Model/Series: DA40 UNDESIGNAT
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: MRC, 681 ft msl
Observation Time: 1715 CDT
Distance from Accident Site: 1 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 31°C / 20°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 7 knots / , 110°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.08 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Mount Pleasant, TN (MRC)
Destination: Mount Pleasant, TN
(MRC)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 35.550278, -87.206667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Robert J Gretz
Additional Participating Persons: James Ruckman; FAA/FSDO; Nashville, TN
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
