This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Crete, NE
Accident Number: CEN18LA363
Date & Time: 09/01/2018, 0900 CDT
Registration: N210PF
Aircraft: Cessna P210N
Injuries: 2 Serious, 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On September 1, 2018, about 0900 central daylight time, a Cessna P210N, N210PF, sustained 
substantial damage during a forced landing to a cornfield following a partial loss of engine 
power after takeoff from the Crete Municipal Airport (CEK), Crete, Nebraska. The pilot and 
right seat passenger received serious injuries, and the two rear seat passengers received minor 
injuries. The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14
 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the flight, which was not on a flight plan. The flight was departing CEX 
and was en route to the Cozad Municipal Airport (CZD), Cozad, Nebraska. 
The pilot reported that he and the co-owner had flown the airplane the night before the 
accident occurred. He stated that the airplane flew normally and that there were no indications 
of any problems. On the morning of the accident, he started the engine but then it stopped. He 
used the low-pressure boost pump to start the engine a second time. He did an engine run-up 
before takeoff, and he stated that the engine was operating normally. He departed runway 17 
and the airplane took most of the 4,201 ft runway before it became airborne. He said that when 
the airplane reached about 500 ft above ground level (agl), the engine did not seem to be 
producing full power. He turned on the low-pressure boost pump and the airplane climbed to 
1,000 ft agl. The pilot turned back toward the airport but the engine continued to lose power, 
so he conducted a forced landing to a cornfield. 
A witness reported that the airplane took most of runway 17 before it lifted off. He stated that 
he observed "dark exhaust" trailing the airplane during the takeoff. The airplane veered to the 
right and he lost sight of it behind a tree line. 
At 0854, the surface weather observation at CEK was: wind 170° at 3 knots; visibility 10 miles; 
sky clear; temperature 24° C; dew point 19° C; and altimeter 29.89 inches of mercury. 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Cessna
Registration: N210PF
Model/Series: P210N
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: Arlyn Copley
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: CEK, 1499 ft msl
Observation Time: 0854 CDT
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 24°C / 19°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 3 knots / , 170°
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.89 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Crete, NE (CEK)
Destination: Cozad, NE (CZD)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 2 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 2 Minor
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 2 Serious, 2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 40.618333, -96.925833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): James P Silliman
Additional Participating Persons: Rick Love; FAA Lincoln FSDO; Lincoln, NE
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
