Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mountain Pass, CA
Accident Number:
LAX07LA147
Date & Time:
05/01/2007, 0715 PDT 
Registration:
N169BC
Aircraft:
Ceridono Vegas Sport Flyer
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The accident airplane was the second of two airplanes to takeoff for the intent of flying 
formation to another airport.  The pilot of the first airplane reported that after takeoff, he made 
a turn to the north followed by a 360-degree turn to locate the second airplane.  He saw the 
airplane following him around in the circle, and once he completed the circle, he again made a 
turn to the north and flew towards their destination.  The first pilot thought that the accident 
pilot was following him, but when he arrived at their destination, he did not see the second 
airplane.  The first pilot returned to the departure airport and noted a small fire off the end of 
the runway in the area where he had last seen the accident airplane.  The first pilot stated that 
at no time during the flight did he hear a transmission from the accident pilot.  There were no 
ground witnesses to the accident.  The wreckage debris was in a confined area and came to rest 
about 30 feet from the ground scars constituting the first point of ground impact on the flat 
open terrain.  The fuselage structure, cockpit, and engine suffered considerable impact and 
thermal damage.  The airframe and engine were examined by FAA inspectors.  Due to the 
impact and thermal damage only partial flight control continuity could be established.  No 
preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures were identified.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of airplane control while maneuvering after takeoff for an undetermined reason.
Page 2 of 7LAX07LA147
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7LAX07LA147
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 1, 2007, about 0715 Pacific daylight time, an experimental Ceridono Vegas Sport Flyer 
airplane, N169BC, crashed into flat open desert terrain shortly after takeoff from Sky Ranch 
Airport (3L2), Sandy Valley, Nevada. The airplane came to rest about 1 1/2 miles south-
southwest of the Nevada/California border. The pilot/owner/builder operated the airplane 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 as a personal flight. The 
pilot, the sole occupant, was killed; the airplane was destroyed by the post impact fire. Day 
visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that departed about 0715, and was 
destined for Calvada Meadows Airport (NV74), Pahrump, Nevada.
According to a friend of the pilot, they were going to fly formation to Pahrump. The friend took 
off first in his airplane, with the accident pilot following him. After takeoff, he made a turn to 
the north followed by a 360-degree turn to locate the accident airplane. He saw the accident 
airplane following him around in the circle. Once he completed the circle, he again made a turn 
to the north and flew towards Pahrump. He thought the accident pilot was following him, but 
when he arrived at Pahrump he did not see the accident airplane. He flew back to Sky Ranch, 
and noted a small fire off the end of the runway in the area where he had last seen the accident 
airplane.  After landing at Sky Ranch, fellow pilots informed him of the accident. The witness 
stated that at no time during the takeoff or flight had he spoken to or heard any radio 
transmissions from the accident pilot.  There were no ground witnesses to the accident.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors responded to the accident site from the Las 
Vegas Flight Standards District Office (FSDO). They reported that the airplane came to rest 
about 30 feet from the first identified point of contact (FIPC), on a magnetic heading of about 
222 degrees. The FAA inspectors were able to establish flight control continuity of the rudder 
cables and elevator push/pull tubes, as well as from the flight control sticks and flap handle 
from the cockpit out to the aileron/flap mixing bell crank. They noted that due to thermal 
damage of the aluminum structure, flight control continuity from the aileron/flap mixing bell 
crank to the flaperons and to the engine controls could not be established.  The cockpit and 
engine suffered substantial fire damage.  The engine was facing in generally the opposite 
direction of the airplane with one of the three propeller blades still attached to the propeller 
hub.  No further engine examination was performed.
According to Clark County Fire Department personnel, they responded to a brush fire (50 feet 
by 50 feet), and upon arrival found it surrounding the aircraft wreckage. 
A person located at a residence about 1/2 mile from the accident site, stated that at 0720 he 
observed smoke emanating from the accident area. He drove out to the accident site, and then 
contacted the fire department to report a fire. The witness stated that the fire was so intense 
that he did not know it was an airplane. He did not hear or see the airplane accident.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of FAA airman records revealed the 80-year-old pilot held a private pilot certificate 
with an airplane single engine land rating. The pilot also held a repairman experimental 
aircraft builder certificate for the accident airplane.  
The pilot held a third-class medical certificate issued on November 07, 2006. It had the 
Page 4 of 7LAX07LA147
limitations that the pilot must wear corrective lenses.
No personal flight records were made available to the National Transportation Safety Board.  
The aeronautical experience listed in this report was obtained from a review of the FAA Airman 
and Medical Records.  These records indicated a total time of 400 hours with 40 hours logged 
in the last 6 months.  The pilot's medical record also reflected that his eyesight (distant and 
near vision) in each eye separately and both eyes together was 20/100 corrected to 20/40.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The high wing two-seat experimental airplane was a 1998 Ceridono Vegas Sport Flyer, serial 
number 01.  A Subaru EA-81 engine powered the airplane.  A review of the aircraft logbook 
revealed an entry on March 16, 2006.  The owner/mechanic had completed an annual 
inspection, and returned the airplane to service in an airworthy condition.  In the annual 
inspection, he noted that the turbocharger experienced a "loss of turbo boost."  When he 
inspected the turbocharger, he found a crack on the mounting flange.  He installed a 
replacement turbocharger and there were no further mechanical problems encountered.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department Coroner Division performed an autopsy on 
the pilot on May 4, 2007. The cause of death was listed as an accident due to "multiple blunt 
force trauma and thermal injuries, seconds." The FAA Forensic Toxicology Research Team, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed a toxicological analysis from samples obtained during 
the autopsy.  Toxicological testing for carbon monoxide and cyanide were not performed. The 
results of the analysis of the specimens were negative for volatiles. The results for tested drugs 
were positive for diltiazem, which was present in both the liver and kidney.
A review of the pilot's FAA airman medical records and toxicology findings by the Safety 
Board's medical officer revealed that the pilot had borderline high-blood pressure, and was 
taking diltiazem.  Diltiazem is commonly used for high blood pressure, and commonly 
approved by the FAA for that use.  The medical officer further noted that the pilot, since 1991, 
on his airman medical application had routinely indicated a "no" response to the question "Do 
You Currently Use Any Medication."
According to the pilot's girlfriend, the pilot was in excellent health and was not sick at the time 
of the accident.  He had woken up the morning of the accident, and was looking forward to the 
flight.
Page 5 of 7LAX07LA147
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
80, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2006
Flight Time:
327 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Ceridono
Registration:
N169BC
Model/Series:
Vegas Sport Flyer 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
01
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Subaru
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
EA-81
Registered Owner:
Robert A. Ceridono
Rated Power:
73 hp
Operator:
Robert A. Ceridono
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7LAX07LA147
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
HND, 2492 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
26 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0756 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
60°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.96 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Sandy Valley, NV (3L2)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Pahrump, NV (NV74)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0710 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Sky Ranch (3L2)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
2599 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.797222, -115.798889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye C Cornejo
Adopted Date:
05/28/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Eric Barr; Federal Aviation Administration; Las Vegas, NV
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7LAX07LA147
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
