Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
San Antonio, TX
Accident Number:
CEN16LA027
Date & Time:
11/02/2015, 1923 CST 
Registration:
N496AE
Aircraft:
BELL 407
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aircraft structural failure
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Air Medical (Discretionary)
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was conducting an emergency medical services flight. The pilot reported 
that, when he climbed the helicopter to a 3-ft hover, he heard a loud bang, and the helicopter 
began an uncommanded right yaw. The pilot applied full left pedal, but this did not arrest the 
yaw. The pilot then lowered the collective, and the helicopter touched down and then rotated 
270 degrees to the right before it came to a stop. 
The tail rotor was examined, and it could be manually rotated, but a grinding noise could be 
heard coming from the damaged No. 3 hanger bearing. The main rotor blades did not rotate in 
synchronization with the tail rotor blades. The No. 3 tail rotor shaft adapter and shaft splines 
were completely ground down, the adapter and shaft had failed, and there was evidence of 
excessive torsion beyond the intended allowable tolerances. The aluminum adapter washer 
hole was elongated, consistent with a loose through bolt, and the drive shaft through bolt had 
worn threads. There was a 1/8-inch gap between the adapter and the base of the hanger 
bearing, consistent with the adapter not being fully in contact with the bearing and potential 
stress within the adapter and shaft splines. The retaining nut had migrated almost .025 inch 
outward and was very loose, consistent with the loss of torque, which would have allowed 
movement between the tail rotor adapter and shaft and led to their eventual failure. A review of 
the helicopter maintenance manual and operator's approved aircraft inspection program 
revealed that neither had a requirement for the tail rotor assembly to be inspected for security.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the No. 3 tail rotor adapter and shaft due to a loss of torque on the retaining nut. 
Contributing to the accident was the lack of a requirement to inspect the tail rotor assembly for 
Page 2 of 6CEN16LA027
security in the helicopter manufacturer's maintenance manual and the operator's approved 
aircraft inspection program.
Findings
Aircraft
Tail rotor drive shaft - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Tail rotor drive shaft - Failure (Cause)
Organizational issues
Adequacy of policy/proc - Manufacturer (Factor)
Adequacy of policy/proc - Operator (Factor)
Page 3 of 6CEN16LA027
Factual Information
On November 2, 2015, at 1923 central standard time, the pilot of a Bell 407, N496AE, made a 
forced landing at San Antonio International Airport (KSAT), San Antonio, Texas. The pilot, 
flight nurse, and paramedic were not injured. The helicopter was substantially damaged. The 
helicopter was registered to and operated by AirEvac EMS, Inc., (EVCA), O'Fallon, Missouri, 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 as an on-demand air medical 
flight. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no 
flight plan had been filed. The flight was originating from KSAT, and was destined for 
Northeast Methodist Hospital (XS83), San Antonio.
When the pilot lifted helicopter to a 3-foot hover, he heard a loud bang and the helicopter 
began an uncommanded right yaw. The pilot applied full left pedal, but this did not arrest the 
yaw. The pilot then lowered the collective and the helicopter touched down, rotating 270 
degrees to the right before coming to a stop. Post-accident examination revealed substantial 
damage to the tail rotor spline, coupling, and hanger bearings.
Postaccident examination revealed the tail rotor could be manually rotated, but a grinding 
noise could be heard coming from the damaged no. 3 hanger bearing. The main rotor blades 
did not rotate in synchronization with the tail rotor blades. The #3 tail rotor shaft adapter and 
shaft splines were completely ground down, and the adapter and the tail rotor shaft connecting 
point had failed. There was evidence of excessive torsion, beyond its intended allowable 
tolerances. There was excessive grease on the hanger bearing. The aluminum adapter washer 
hole was elongated, consistent with of a loose through-bolt. There was a 1/8
th 
inch gap 
between the adapter and the base of the hanger bearing, consistent with the adapter not being 
fully in contact with the bearing and potential stress within the adapter and shaft splines. The 
smaller, stainless steel washer was mushroom-shaped. The drive shaft through-bolt had worn 
threads.
On November 18 and 19, 2105, the tail rotor assembly was examined at the facilities of Able 
Engineering, Mesa, Arizona, under the auspices of an FAA aviation safety inspector from the 
Scottsdale, Arizona, FSDO. Bell Helicopters and AirEvac EMS also participated in the 
examination. The shaft, freewheeling unit and tail gear box were examined. No issues were 
noted except for the failed coupling and shaft. The retaining stud had migrated almost .025" 
outward and was very loose compared to the others, consistent with the loss of torque that 
would have allowed movement between the coupling and shaft and eventual failure.
After the examination, Air Evac EMS ordered an inspection of their entire Bell 407 fleet. Two 
helicopters were found to have loose tail rotor drive shafts. The drive shaft, carrier bearing, 
coupling, and spline from one of those helicopters were examined the next day. The retaining 
nut was loose. Torque was measured at 20 inch-pounds. Minimum torque is 30 to 50 inch-
pounds. Tare was 5 to 0 inch-pounds. Stud extension was within millimeter limits. There was a 
slight motion between the coupling face and the face of the bearing. This motion had worn the 
coupling face and there was slight wear on some of the splines. In the Bell 407 Maintenance 
Page 4 of 6CEN16LA027
Manual and Air Evac EMS' AAIP, there is no requirement for the assembly to be inspected for 
security.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-hover
Aircraft structural failure (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/16/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/15/2015
Flight Time:
2201 hours (Total, all aircraft), 28 hours (Total, this make and model), 1207 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 97 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2626 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N496AE
Model/Series:
407 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
1999
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53328
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/02/2015, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
7939 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls Royce
ELT:
C126 installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
M250-C47B
Registered Owner:
Air Evac EMS, Inc.
Rated Power:
630 hp
Operator:
Air Evac EMS, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
EVCA
Page 5 of 6CEN16LA027
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSAT, 809 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1851 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
San Antonio, TX (KSAT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
San Antonio, TX (XS83)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1923 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
San Antonio International (KSAT)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
809 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
29.533889, -98.469167 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
08/01/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Jesse Sanchez; FAA Flight Standards District Office; San Antonio, TX
Mark Pritchett; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Scottsdale, AZ
Tony Bonham; Air Evac EMS; O'Fallon, MO
Aaron Slager; Bell Helicopters, Inc.; Fort Worth, TX
Publish Date:
07/12/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92279
Page 6 of 6CEN16LA027
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
