Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bountiful, UT
Accident Number:
WPR13LA109
Date & Time:
02/01/2013, 1330 MST 
Registration:
N8554W
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-28-235
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that, following an uneventful takeoff, he initiated a right turn to the 
crosswind leg of the traffic pattern when the engine lost power.  He continued to turn the 
airplane right toward the departure runway while switching to the right fuel tank, but there 
was no change in engine power. Unable to make it to the runway, he initiated a forced landing 
into an open, snow-covered field.  During the landing roll, the right main landing gear 
submerged in the snow, the airplane veered to the right, and the left wing struck the ground.  A 
postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.  A local reporting station 
recorded the temperature as 43 degrees F and dew point as 28 degrees F. Although the 
reported weather conditions were conducive to carburetor icing at glide and cruise power, the 
engine was operating at a high power setting for takeoff, indicating that carburetor ice likely 
was not the reason for the loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power during initial climb for reasons that could not be determined 
because postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that 
would have precluded normal operation.
Findings
Environmental issues
Snowy/icy terrain - Not specified
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR13LA109
Factual Information
On February 1, 2013, about 1330 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-28-235, N8554W, 
sustained substantial damage during a forced landing near Skypark Airport (BTF), Bountiful, 
Utah.  The airplane was registered to private individuals and operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The private pilot, sole occupant of 
the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan 
was filed for the local flight, which originated from BTF about 10 minutes prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) that he departed runway 34, and remained within the airport 
traffic pattern for a series of tough-and-go landings.  The pilot stated that following an 
uneventful touch-and-go landing, he departed runway 34.  As he initiated a right turn to the 
crosswind leg of the traffic pattern, the engine lost power.  The pilot continued to turn right 
towards the departure runway while switching to the right fuel tank with no change in engine 
power noted.   The pilot further stated that he realized he was unable to make it to the runway, 
and initiated a forced landing into an open snow covered field.  During the landing roll, the 
right main landing gear submerged within the snow, and the airplane veered to the right and 
the left wing struck the ground. 
Examination of the recovered airframe by the NTSB IIC and an FAA inspector revealed that the 
left wing was mostly separated from the fuselage.  Fuel was observed in both the left and right 
inboard and outboard fuel tanks.  Control continuity was established from the carburetor heat, 
throttle, and mixture controls to their respective linkages on the engine and air box.  The 
airframe fuel pump was actuated, and could be heard functioning.  However, due to the 
attitude the fuselage was positioned, fuel was not transferred to the fuel pump.  
Examination of the recovered Lycoming O-540-B2B5 engine, serial number L-6650-40, 
revealed that it remained attached to the fuselage via its mounts.  The top spark plugs, 
carburetor, and propeller were removed from the engine, and the magneto P leads were 
disconnected from the left and right magnetos.  The crankshaft was rotated by hand, and 
mechanical continuity was established throughout the engine and valve train.  Thumb 
compression was obtained on all six cylinders.  Both the left and right magnetos produced a 
blue colored spark on all ignition leads when the crankshaft was rotated.
The carburetor throttle and mixture levers moved from stop to stop by hand.  When the 
throttle control arm was moved, the accelerator pump functioned and expelled liquid.  The fuel 
inlet screen contained a slight amount of debris, however, it was mostly unobstructed.  The 
carburetor was disassembled and examined internally.  Both metal floats were intact and 
undamaged.  The carburetor float bowl contained a liquid consistent with fuel.  The liquid was 
tested with water finding paste with negative results.  The top spark plugs exhibited signatures 
consistent with normal operation with dark gray deposits within the electrode area.
Examination of the recovered airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation
Weather conditions recorded at the Salt Lake City International Airport, located about 5 miles 
southwest of the accident site, at 1353, were wind from 350 degrees at 5 knots, visibility 10 
statute miles, few clouds at 6,000 feet, temperature 43 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 28 
degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.32 inches of mercury.  According to the 
Page 3 of 5WPR13LA109
Federal Aviation Administration Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin, entitled 
Carburetor Icing Prevention, the temperature and dew point were conducive to the formation 
of icing at glide and cruise power.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/11/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/05/2011
Flight Time:
240 hours (Total, all aircraft), 117 hours (Total, this make and model), 198 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N8554W
Model/Series:
PA-28-235 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-10067
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/07/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4625 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-540 SERIES
Registered Owner:
NEILSEN MARTIN D
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
Curtis Jolley
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR13LA109
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SLC, 4227 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
170째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.32 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6째C / -2째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bountiful, UT (BTF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bountiful, UT (BTF)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1320 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Skypark Airport (BTF)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4234 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4700 ft / 70 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Traffic 
Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.869167, -111.926944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua Cawthra
Adopted Date:
07/18/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
David J Rodda; Federal Aviation Administration; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
07/18/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86123
Page 5 of 5WPR13LA109
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
