Both aircraft collided on short final approach to the runway.  Examination of both aircraft 
disclosed that the Yak-55M descended on top of the Cessna 172 while over the threshold.  The 
pilot of the Yak-55M stated that the was returning to the field after practicing aerobatic 
maneuvers and entered left traffic for runway 15 by crossing over the runway at midfield.  As he 
overflew the runway he heard an aircraft call on final approach for runway 15 over the CTAF.  
He observed an aircraft on a 1/2-mile final and followed that aircraft on a short turning base to 
final approach.  As he rolled out on final and prepared to flare, he felt the collision with an 
unseen aircraft.  The pilot of the Cessna 172 stated that he was in the traffic pattern practicing 
takeoffs and landings.  He said that he called on the CTAF number three for landing behind a 
Cessna 150 and extended his pattern slightly to allow time for that aircraft to clear the runway.  
The pilot also reported that he announced his position while on base and final approach.  Just 
as he was flaring the aircraft, he felt a jolt and the aircraft was forced down onto the runway.  
The pilot of a Cessna 150 in the pattern behind the Cessna 172 stated that he was on downwind 
when the Yak-55M crossed over the field and cut him off while turning on downwind.  The 
witness reported that the Yak-55M nearly hit his aircraft. 
The pilot of the other aircraft's inadequate visual lookout 
 On August 1, 1998, at 1215 hours Pacific daylight time, a Yakolev YAK-55M, N910RT, collided 
with a Cessna 172M, N4451R, while both aircraft were on short final approach to runway 15 at 
the Lincoln, California, airport.  Both aircraft sustained substantial damage.  Neither of the 
respective private pilots, the sole occupants of their aircraft, were injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and flight plans were not filed for either operation.  The 
Yakolev, owned and operated by its pilot, was returning to the airport at the conclusion of a 
local area personal flight, which originated about 1130.  The Cessna, rented by its pilot from the 
operator, Atkin Air at the Lincoln airport, was in the traffic pattern performing takeoff and 
landing practice.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors from the Sacramento, California, Flight 
Standards District Office responded to the accident site, examined the two aircraft, and 
interviewed both pilots and a witness to the accident.
The pilot of the Yak-55M stated that he was returning to the field after practicing aerobatic 
maneuvers and entered left traffic for runway 15 by crossing over the runway at midfield.  As he 
overflew the runway he heard an aircraft call on final approach for runway 15 over the 
Common Traffic Advisory Frequency (CTAF).  He observed an aircraft on a 1/2-mile final and 
followed that aircraft on a short turning base to final approach.  As he rolled out on final and 
prepared to flare, he felt the collision with an unseen aircraft.
The pilot of the Cessna 172 stated that he was in the traffic pattern practicing takeoffs and 
landings.  He stated that he called on the CTAF number three for landing behind a Cessna 150 
and extended his pattern slightly to allow time for that aircraft to clear the runway.  The pilot 
also reported that he announced his position while on base and final approach.  Just as he was 
flaring the aircraft, he felt a jolt and the aircraft was forced down onto the runway.
The pilot of a Cessna 150 in the pattern behind the Cessna 172 stated that he was on downwind 
when the Yak-55M crossed over the field and cut him off while turning on downwind.  The 
witness reported that the Yak-55M nearly hit his aircraft.
