The non-instrument rated pilot transmitted that he was lost in the clouds and requested help. 
He began to transmit his position and heading, and then no further transmissions were 
overheard. The airplane was located at 7,200 feet msl in steep, mountainous terrain extending 
upwards to 10,000 feet msl. Pilots flying in the area reported VFR weather with cloud bases at 
5,000 feet msl, and cloud tops at 9,000 feet msl. These pilots stated that most of the mountain 
was in the clear, and that they were able to pick their way around the clouds. The airplane and 
pilot could not be recovered due to hazardous terrain and inclement weather. 
The pilot's intentional continued VFR flight into IMC. Factors were the scattered to broken 
clouds, and the mountainous terrain. 
 On August 1, 1998, about 1340 Alaska daylight time, a Piper PA-28-140 airplane, N2350T, was 
destroyed when it collided with rising terrain, about 37 miles southwest of Cantwell, Alaska, at 
position 63 degrees 14.54 minutes North latitude, 150 degrees 11.95 minutes West longitude.  
The solo private pilot sustained fatal injuries. The flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.  
The flight departed Merrill Field, Anchorage, Alaska, at 1238, destined for Fairbanks, Alaska.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed along the proposed route of flight at the time of the 
accident, and a VFR flight plan was filed. The pilot did not hold an instrument rating. 
About 1335, an air taxi pilot inbound for Talkeetna, Alaska, overheard a radio transmission on 
123.6 MHz from the accident pilot calling Talkeetna Radio. The accident pilot stated his full 
aircraft call sign, and said he was lost in the clouds and wanted help.  The Talkeetna Flight 
Service Station did not receive the transmission, but two airborne air taxi pilots did.  Both air 
taxi pilots told the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) during telephone interviews on August 4, 
that the pilot sounded stressed and frantic. They reported to the IIC that the pilot began to give 
his position, and then stated he was tracking 235. No other transmissions were received. 
An Emergency Locator Transmitter signal was received from the south side of Mount McKinley 
at 1440.
The airplane was located about 2100 in mountainous terrain by an Alaska Air National Guard 
helicopter. Terrain within 10 miles of the accident site extends up to 10,000 feet msl. The 
wreckage was situated approximately 7,200 feet msl, about 300 feet below a ridge. 
Two Alaska Air National Guard Pararescuemen (PJs) climbed to the accident site after being 
landed by helicopter on the ridge above, and confirmed the pilot was deceased. These two PJs 
informed the NTSB IIC on August 2 that the airplane had impacted a 45 degree snow slope in a 
level attitude. They described the front half of the airplane buried in the snow, and the tail 
sticking out. The cabin was full of camping gear.  The airplane was described as unstable, with 
the possibility of sliding down a several thousand feet long snow slope.  No photographs were 
taken by the PJs. 
Due to unfavorable weather, nearly continuous snowfall, avalanche danger, and steep terrain, 
the airplane and pilot were not recovered.
The reported clouds at Cantwell, 27 miles northeast of the accident site, at the time of the 
accident were scattered clouds at 7,000 feet msl. Three air taxi pilots interviewed by the IIC 
related that after overhearing the pilot's distress call, they looked to the north and observed a 
layer of scattered to broken clouds and cumulus buildups along the eastern flank of the 
McKinley massif. All the pilots interviewed indicated the bases of the clouds were about 5,000 
feet msl, and that it was clear above 9,000 feet. They each stated that most of the mountain 
range was in the clear, and that they were able to pick their way around the clouds.
The pilot's brother was interviewed by the IIC on August 3. He indicated that the pilot departed 
California on July 11, and did not intend to return until the end of August. He had purchased a 
new GPS for the trip. The airplane and pilot logs were in the airplane. The pilot's family 
completed the NTSB Pilot/Operator report.
