The pilot reported that at an altitude of 60 to 70 feet above the ground a sudden loss of power 
occurred followed by a 'rapid descent' into a line of trees at the north end of the runway.  The 
right wing of the airplane contacted a large cedar tree at a height of about 15 to 18 feet above 
the ground.  Post accident inspection of the airplane failed to reveal any reason for the loss of 
power. 
a loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.  A factor associated with the accident were 
the trees which the airplane contacted and the low altitude at which the loss of power occurred. 
 On August 1, 1998, at 1915 central daylight time (cdt), a Piper PA-20, N127X, owned and 
operated by a private pilot, was substantially damaged during a collision with the terrain 
shortly after takeoff from the Brady-Pippin Airstrip (private, 2,000' sod) in Andover, Kansas.  
The pilot reported a loss of engine power on takeoff.  The pilot and two passengers were not 
injured.  Two remaining passengers received minor injuries.  The personal 14 CFR Part 91 
flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The local flight 
was departing at the time of takeoff.
The pilot reported that everything appeared normal during the aircraft preflight, engine run-
up, taxi, and initial takeoff.  He reported that at an altitude of 60 to 70 feet above the ground a 
sudden loss of power occurred followed by a "rapid descent" into a line of trees at the north end 
of the runway.  According to the Butler County Sheriff's Office, the right wing of the airplane 
contacted a large cedar tree at a height of about 15 to 18 feet above the ground.  Their report 
states, "This caused the plane to spin or turn toward the east throwing it down onto the 
highway onto the left side of the plane crashing the wing and left side of the plane onto the 
roadway."  The airplane came to rest on SW70th on a easterly heading.
The airplane was examined by inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration Wichita, 
Kansas, Flight Standards District Office.  Their inspection of the engine failed to reveal any 
reason for the loss of power.
