The pilot was taxiing for departure on a north-south taxiway for a departure from runway 18R.  
He reported that the ATIS advised all traffic to watch the flagmen for ATC instructions.  The 
pilot reported that he was watching the flagman as instructed.  The pilot reported, 'The 
flagman gave me a signal to stop as I approached the intersection, and then changed to the 
right turn signal.  I started my right turn.  The flagman gave me no indication that there was an 
aircraft in my path, or that I should do anything other than complete the turn.'  He reported 
that he was about halfway through the turn when his propeller struck the right wingtip of the 
RV-6.  He reported, 'I was confident that this area was clear because the flagman, with a clear 
view, directed me to make the turn.' 
The pilot failed to maintain clearance from the other airplane while taxiing. 
 On August 1, 1998, at 1840 central daylight time, a Cessna 180, N111WF, operated by Fletcher 
Aviation Inc., taxiied into the right wing of an experimental Preece VANS RV-6, N122BP.  The 
RV-6 was number three holding short for takeoff from runway 18 at Oshkosh Municipal 
Airport, Oshkosh, Wisconsin.  The Cessna 180 was turning on the taxiway when its propeller 
impacted the right wing of the RV-6.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident.
The pilot was taxiing for departure on a north-south taxiway for a departure from runway 18R.  
He reported that the ATIS advised all traffic to watch the flagmen for ATC instructions.  He 
reported that he saw an RV-6 taxi across the front of his airplane when he was about 400 to 
500 feet from the intersection.  The pilot reported that he was watching the flagman as 
instructed.
The pilot reported, "The flagman have me a signal to stop as I approached the intersection, and 
then changed to the right turn signal.  I started my right turn.  The flagman game me no 
indication that there was an aircraft in my path, or that I should do anything other than 
complete the turn."  He reported that he was about halfway through the turn when his 
propeller struck the right wingtip of the RV-6.  He reported, "I was confident that this area was 
clear because the flagman, with a clear view, directed me to make the turn."
The pilot reported that the Cessna 180, a tail wheel airplane, had a blind spot directly in front 
and to the right when piloting the airplane from the left seat.  
The pilot of the RV-6 reported that he was not aware of the conflict until the Cessna's propeller 
hit the right wing and aileron of his airplane.
