Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Cumberland, RI
Accident Number:
NYC08LA299
Date & Time:
09/01/2008, 0830 EDT 
Registration:
N5529J
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-32-260
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel starvation
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The owner/pilot departed in the single-engine airplane for the personal cross-country flight. 
He climbed to and set the power for a cruise altitude of 7,500 feet, and noted that his digital 
engine monitor indicated an engine speed of 2,300 rpm. Shortly thereafter, without any 
unusual noises or vibration, the engine speed decreased to 1,100 rpm, the manifold pressure 
appeared unchanged, and the airplane started to descend. The pilot exercised the propeller 
control to increase the rpm, but there was no response to his inputs. He declared an 
emergency, and attempted to divert to a nearby airport, but then elected to perform an off-
airport landing in a field. During the rollout, the airplane struck bushes and trees that bordered 
the field. The pilot received minor injuries, and there was no fuel spill. Post-accident 
examination of the airplane revealed that the two inboard fuel tanks were full, the right 
outboard contained several gallons, and the left outboard tank contained only trace amounts of 
fuel. The fuel selector valve was reset to one of the main tanks; the engine started readily, and 
ran normally. Engine monitor data showed that during the flight, combustion had ceased, but 
the propeller continued to windmill during the 6 minutes of the descent. The pilot did not 
recognize the power loss, and misdiagnosed it as a propeller problem, and did not continue his 
trouble-shooting to positively identify and correct the underlying problem. In addition, the 
pilot's fuel management procedures were not in compliance with the procedures specified in 
the airplane manufacturer's operating manual. It stated that, "...If time permits,"  the pilot 
should manipulate the throttle and fuel selector in a continued attempt to restore engine 
power. Below that, a note stated "...If engine power was caused by fuel exhaustion, power will 
not be regained after tanks are switched until empty fuel lines are filled, which may require up 
to ten seconds...."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper fuel management practices, which resulted in fuel starvation and a 
complete power loss. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's misdiagnosis of the situation, 
and his cessation of trouble-shooting to positively identify and correct the underlying problem.
Page 2 of 9NYC08LA299
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel distribution - Incorrect use/operation
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Use of policy/procedure - Pilot (Cause)
Identification/recognition - Pilot (Factor)
Use of checklist - Pilot
Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 9NYC08LA299
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On September 1, 2008, about 0830 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-32-260, N5529J, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing in a field near Cumberland, Rhode Island. The 
pilot/owner was uninjured. The personal flight was operated under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed. 
According to the pilot, he added a quart of oil to the engine prior to the flight. He then departed 
Theodore Francis Green State Airport (PVD), Providence, Rhode Island, about 0750, for his 
intended destination of Mount Washington Regional Airport (HIE), Whitefield, New 
Hampshire. The pilot contacted the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Boston air traffic 
control (ATC) facility for flight following services, and climbed to an indicated cruise altitude of 
7,500 feet above mean sea level (msl). He leaned the mixture for cruise, and his digital engine 
monitor indicated an engine speed of 2,300 rpm. 
At some point just outside the Boston Class B airspace, the engine speed decreased to 
approximately 1,100 rpm, and the airplane slowed, and started to descend. The pilot did not 
hear any unusual noises, or feel any unusual vibrations, prior to the rpm decrease. He 
exercised the propeller control to increase the rpm, but there was no response to his inputs. 
The pilot noted a manifold pressure (MP) of approximately 22 1/2 inches. 
The airplane continued to lose altitude. The pilot radioed Boston ATC, waited approximately 
20 to 30 seconds, but did not receive a response. He then declared an emergency, and in 
response, Boston ATC informed the pilot of the two airports closest to his current position. The 
pilot was familiar with one of them, North Central State Airport (SFZ), Pawtucket, Rhode 
Island, so he opted for that, even though it was behind him. He turned the airplane to the 
south, and acquired the airport visually. The pilot attempted to maintain the airplane™s 
recommended best glide speed during the descent. At some point during the descent, Boston 
ATC requested the pilot to switch communications to Providence ATC, and the pilot complied 
with the request.  
When the airplane was at approximately 2,800 feet msl, the pilot determined that he was not 
going to reach the intended diversion airport. He spotted a field to the east of his position that 
appeared suitable for an off-airport landing, and headed for that field. In preparation for the 
off-airport landing, at an altitude of approximately 2,500 feet msl, the pilot switched the fuel 
selector valve to the "OFF" position, and shut off all the airplane's electrical systems. The pilot 
slipped the airplane in a steep descent from an altitude of approximately 2,200 feet msl, in 
order to place the airplane in a position for landing on the field. The touchdown was "fine," but 
during the rollout, the airplane struck bushes and trees that bordered the field. There was no 
fuel spill, and no fire.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the pilot held a private pilot certificate, with an airplane single-
engine land rating. The pilot reported 550 total hours of flight experience on his most recent 
application for an FAA third-class medical certificate, which was issued in January, 2008. His 
most recent flight review was completed in April, 2007. 
Page 4 of 9NYC08LA299
Examination of the pilot's logbook that was provided to the investigation indicated that he had 
approximately 255 total hours of flight experience, including approximately 62 hours in the 
accident airplane make and model, all of which was in the accident airplane. In subsequent 
communications, the pilot stated that his records showed that he had 580 hours total time, 
including approximately 385 hours in the accident airplane.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION 
The airplane was manufactured in 1968. It was a low-wing monoplane with fixed tricycle-style 
landing gear. It was equipped with a Lycoming O-540 series piston engine and a constant-
speed propeller. The airplane was registered to the pilot in June 2005. According to the 
maintenance records, the most recent annual inspection was completed in January 2008, at 
which time the airplane had 4,952.2 total hours in service. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The 0835 surface weather observation at SFZ, located approximately 5 miles from the accident 
location, reported winds from 320 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, 
temperature 18 degrees C, dew point 11 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.14 inches of 
mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The airplane landed in a grassy field located approximately 5 1/2 miles northeast of SFZ. 
According to the FAA inspector who responded to the accident, the airplane was removed from 
the vegetation and visually examined. None of the vegetation displayed any cuts consistent 
with being struck by a rotating propeller. The inboard leading edge of the right wing sustained 
minor damage, and the outboard section of the left wing sustained significant damage. The left 
wing was rotated about 5 degrees in the horizontal plane, in a direction that displaced the wing 
tip aft of its original position. None of the fuel tanks or fuel lines was breached. The two 
inboard fuel tanks were full, the right outboard tank was "more than half" full, and the left 
outboard tank contained only trace amounts of fuel. The fuel selector valve was found in the 
"OFF" position. Only about 1 1/2 ounces of fuel were able to be obtained from the carburetor 
bowl via the drain plug. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Airplane Fuel System and Procedures
The fuel system schematic in the airplane manufacturer's Owner's Handbook (OH) indicated 
that the airplane was equipped with four separate fuel tanks. Each wing had a 25-gallon 
capacity main tank, and a 17-gallon capacity tip tank, and each fuel tank was equipped with a 
dedicated fuel quantity gauge in the cockpit. Each tank was plumbed directly to the fuel 
selector valve, which enabled a pilot to select only one fuel tank to supply the engine at any 
given time. The fuel selector valve was also equipped with an "OFF" setting, which prevented 
fuel from being supplied to the engine. 
The OH stated that "takeoff should be made on the tank with the highest quantity of fuel." For 
cruise flight, the OH stated that "In order to keep the airplane in best lateral trim during cruise, 
the fuel should be used alternately from each main tank, and when they are nearly exhausted, 
from each tip tank. It is recommended that one main tank be used for one hour after takeoff; 
the other main tank be used until nearly exhausted, then return to the first main tank. When 
exhausted, turn to one tip tank and alternate at one-half hour intervals to maintain lateral 
Page 5 of 9NYC08LA299
trim."
Engine Data Monitor
The airplane was equipped with a JPI Instruments model EDM-800 engine monitor that was 
mounted in the cockpit, and provided both digital and analog graphic displays of multiple 
engine parameters. According to the manufacturer, "the EDM will monitor up to twenty-four 
critical parameters in your engine, four times a second, with an accuracy of better than 2 
[degrees] Fahrenheit." EDM 800 parameters included exhaust gas temperature (EGT) and 
cylinder head temperature (CHT) for each cylinder, fuel flow, engine rpm, manifold pressure 
and percent horsepower being developed. The monitor started automatically and operated 
continuously whenever electrical power was applied on the airplane; it did not require any pilot 
action to initiate, or to display the information during flight. The monitor was equipped with 
non-volatile memory which permitted the recording and storage of engine parameters from 
multiple flights.
The EDM-800 was removed from the airplane, and provided to the National Transportation 
Safety Board recorders laboratory in order to retrieve the recorded information from the 
accident flight. The data indicated that approximately 30 minutes into the flight, the EGT, CHT 
and other engine parameters were consistent with normal engine operation in cruise flight. 
Just prior to the rpm loss, when the engine was operating at 2,200 rpm and 22 inches of MP, 
the EGT values were approximately 1,300 degrees F, and the CHT values were approximately 
340 degrees F. At an EDM-indicated time of 1330:10, the rpm began to decrease, and 1 minute 
later, the rpm was approximately 1,200. The EGT values decreased approximately 1,000 
degrees F during that same period. The CHT values decreased 150 degrees F, over a period of 3 
minutes. The MP did not change appreciably, and began to increase as the airplane descended.
Owner's Handbook Procedures: Engine Power Loss in Flight
The OH Emergency Procedures chapter contained a section entitled "Engine Power Loss in 
Flight,", and the section contained the following discussion and guidance: "Complete engine 
power loss is usually caused by fuel flow interruption, and power will be restored after fuel flow 
is restored...Maintain an airspeed of at least 100 mph, and if altitude permits, proceed as 
follows." 
The OH then presented a two-section checklist for the pilot to use to attempt to restore power. 
The first item in the first section was "Fuel Selector- Switch to another tank containing fuel," 
and the second was "Electric Fuel Pump - On." The fourth checklist item was "Engine Gauges - 
Check for an indication of the cause of power loss," and the seventh item was "If no fuel 
pressure is indicated, check tank selector position to be sure it is on a tank containing fuel." 
After the seventh item, the checklist provided two items to be conducted "When power is 
restored." 
The second section of the checklist was contained under the heading "If time permits," and the 
last two items instructed the pilot to manipulate the throttle and fuel selector in a continued 
attempt to restore engine power. Below that, a note stated "If engine power was caused by fuel 
exhaustion, power will not be regained after tanks are switched until empty fuel lines are filled, 
which may require up to ten seconds." 
Post Accident Engine Run
After the airplane was removed from the vegetation and examined, the FAA attempted to run 
Page 6 of 9NYC08LA299
the engine. The fuel selector valve was set to one of the main tanks, and the engine started 
readily, and ran normally. The propeller appeared to respond correctly to the control inputs, 
and no mechanical or operational anomalies were noted with either the engine or the propeller. 
The engine was shut down, the carburetor was drained again, and approximately 9 to 10 
ounces of fuel were obtained from the carburetor bowl via the drain plug.
Additional Pilot-provided Information 
In one written statement provided by the pilot, he stated that when he checked the fuel tanks 
during his pre-flight inspection, the two main tanks were full, and each tip tank contained 
approximately 3 to 4 gallons, for a takeoff fuel quantity of approximately 56 to 58 gallons. Also 
in a written statement, the pilot indicated that he "did [the] emergency checklist - couldn't get 
prop to work," but he did not explicitly note which checklist he executed, and he did not 
mention any actions related to the fuel system. None of the pilot's written statements contained 
any information regarding which fuel tank he used for takeoff, climb or cruise, or whether he 
switched fuel tanks at any point in the flight. The statements did not provide any information 
regarding whether, in response to the rpm loss, and while still airborne, the pilot checked the 
fuel quantities in the various tanks, or switched tanks using the fuel selector valve. 
In verbal discussions with investigators, the pilot stated that prior to the flight preceding the 
accident flight, he topped off all four fuel tanks in Bar Harbor, Maine, and then flew to PVD. He 
said that this flight was approximately 2 hours in duration, and that he utilized fuel from the 
tip tanks for the flight. Regarding the accident flight, the pilot believed that he took off from 
PVD using the right main tank, and that he did not change the fuel selector valve position 
during the flight. He also stated that he did not manipulate the throttle or the fuel selector 
valve immediately after the rpm loss, or during the ensuing descent. In addition, the pilot 
noted that during the flight, he wore a Lightspeed brand model 15-XL noise cancelling headset, 
and that when the rpm loss occurred, he did not note any change in engine sound. 
Approximately 6 weeks after the event, the pilot told investigators that he concluded that 
"perhaps" he might have been "too calm" about the situation, which might have resulted in the 
fact that he "abandoned problem solving" too soon to permit positive identification and 
correction of the cause for the rpm loss.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel starvation (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Page 7 of 9NYC08LA299
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
58, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/31/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/01/2007
Flight Time:
580 hours (Total, all aircraft), 385 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N5529J
Model/Series:
PA-32-260 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-540 SERIES
Registered Owner:
Tri-Radial Flyers
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
Tri-Radial Flyers
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 8 of 9NYC08LA299
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SFZ
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0835 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Providence, RI (PVD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Cumberland, RI (SZF)
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
0000 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.971389, -71.561944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael C Huhn
Adopted Date:
03/23/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Henrique Mendes; FAA/FSDO; Boston, MA
Publish Date:
03/23/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 9 of 9NYC08LA299
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
