Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Uvalde, TX
Accident Number:
DFW08LA223
Date & Time:
09/01/2008, 1400 CDT 
Registration:
N8472V
Aircraft:
ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL S-2R
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The engine of the agricultural airplane lost power while it was maneuvering at low altitude.  
The airplane impacted thick vegetation and terrain, causing substantial damage to the right 
wing, nose and tail. A subsequent teardown examination of the engine showed little evidence 
that the engine was operating at the time of impact, but the ingestion of vegetation into the 
combustor and the torsional failure of the torsion shaft suggests that there was some rotation 
of the engine at the time of impact. The engine examination also revealed that several turbine 
rotors had damage and missing blade material due to short term operation of the engine at an 
over temperature condition. There was evidence that the rotors had been operating for several 
hours after the over temperature event that caused the stress rupture of the blades. Further, 
the examination showed that the first stage turbine rotor and the prop pitch control cam did 
not conform to Honeywell specifications and were not authorized replacement parts, and a 
previous weld repair on the engine combustor plenum did not conform to standard practices 
for weld repairs on aerospace parts.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to the improper use of unauthorized replacement parts in the 
engine and repeated operation of the engine in an over-temperature condition.
Findings
Aircraft
Turbine section - Damaged/degraded (Cause)
Turbine section - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Engine (turbine/turboprop) - Failure (Cause)
Return to service - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Unauthorized maint/repair - Not specified (Cause)
Page 2 of 5DFW08LA223
Factual Information
On September 1, 2008, approximately 1500 central daylight time (CDT), a Rockwell 
International S-2R, N8472V, registered to Farm & Ranch Aerial Service Inc., and operated by 
Rusty™s Flying Service as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 agricultural flight, crashed 
while maneuvering at low altitude.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and flight plan 
had not been filed. The airplane was substantially damaged by the impact forces. The 
commercial pilot, who was the only occupant, was not injured. The airplane had departed the 
Glasscock Field Airport (4TS8) D™Hanis, Texas.
The pilot reported he was half way through his third pass over a 200 acre cotton field and had 
80 gallons of chemical and 180 gallons of fuel on board when the engine surged twice and then 
completely failed.  The pilot was able to clear the bigger oak trees on the edge of the field and 
he stalled the airplane into a thick patch of brush.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that responded to the accident scene 
reported that the airplane appeared to have stalled tail first into thick vegetation, impacted 
terrain and came to rest upright. The right wing, nose and tail were crushed from the impact.  
One of the three blades on the propeller appeared to be undamaged. A second blade had a 
single bend and the third blade had a S- type bend.
The wreckage was removed from the accident scene and transported to the facilities of Air 
Salvage of Dallas (ASOD), near Lancaster, Texas. On September 19, 2008 the Board 
investigator-in-charge examined the wreckage at ASOD and the engine was removed from the 
airplane and shipped to the Honeywell Product Integrity Investigation Laboratory in Phoenix, 
Arizona.  On November 18, 2008 a teardown and examination of the engine was conducted at 
that facility under the oversight of an FAA inspector. The examination shows evidence of over 
temperature damage and missing material from turbine rotor blades. A metallurgical 
examination shows that the first stage turbine rotor and the prop pitch control cam do not 
conform to Honeywell specifications and are not authorized replacement parts. The 
configuration of the control system components on the engine do not meet the type certificate 
specifications and a previous weld repair on the engine combustor plenum does not conform to 
standard practices for weld repairs on aerospace parts.
Airplane maintenance logbooks could not be located and were not available for inspection. The 
Hobbs meter reading at the accident site was 874.4. A few selected pages of maintenance 
records for the engine were located that covered the period from June 20, 2004 at 3369.5 
engine time since overhaul (TSOH) until the last entry at 4763.4 TSOH on June 24, 2008. A 
maintenance record entry by a certified repair station on June 24, 2008, shows that a hot 
section inspection was performed; the engine was returned to service and reinstalled on 
N8472V at a Hobbs meter reading of 442.0.
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 3 of 5DFW08LA223
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
28, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/10/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/18/2006
Flight Time:
2300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 400 hours (Total, this make and model), 2220 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 400 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL
Registration:
N8472V
Model/Series:
S-2R 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
2232R
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/14/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
6900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
432 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
7935 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Honeywell Garrett
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
TPE 331-1-151
Registered Owner:
FARM & RANCH AERIAL 
SERVICE INC
Rated Power:
665 hp
Operator:
LINDEMAN, RUSTY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Rusty's Flying Service
Operator Designator Code:
UXRG
Page 4 of 5DFW08LA223
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KUVA, 942 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1328 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
196°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.8 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
34°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
D'Hanis, TX (4TS8)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
D'Hanis, TX (4TS8)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
29.341944, -99.705278 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Latson
Adopted Date:
05/06/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Victor H Lopez; FAA San Antonio FSDO; San Antonio, TX
John A Eller; FAA Scottsdale FSDO; Scottsdale, AZ
Dana Metz; Honeywell Aerospace; Phoenix, AZ
Publish Date:
05/06/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5DFW08LA223
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
