Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Virden, IL
Accident Number:
CEN15LA335
Date & Time:
08/01/2015, 1340 CDT 
Registration:
N502LH
Aircraft:
AIR TRACTOR INC AT 502B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of lift
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The pilot reported that the airplane had just been loaded and that he was beginning his sixth 
agricultural application flight of the day. He noted that, during the previous flights, the wind 
was from the southwest-southeast and less than 5 knots. Before departing on the sixth flight, 
he checked the wind sock, which indicated that the wind was from the southwest. He also 
checked his handheld GPS, which indicated that the local area wind was mainly from the west 
at 3 to 5 knots. The pilot started the takeoff roll on the runway heading west and noted that, 
three-quarters of the way down the runway, the airspeed had not yet reached takeoff speed. He 
jettisoned some of the load so that the airplane could clear the corn at the end of the runway. 
When the airplane cleared the corn, the pilot ceased the jettison. However, the airplane then 
began to descend, so the pilot jettisoned more of the load. The airplane continued to descend, 
banked hard left, and impacted the ground. 
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical malfunctions with the airplane that would 
have precluded normal operation. The airplane was only about 30 lbs below its maximum 
gross weight. Witnesses stated that, immediately after the accident, the wind was from the 
southeast about 6 knots, which would have resulted in a quartering tailwind during the takeoff. 
It is likely that the combined effects of the airplane™s near maximum gross weight and the 
quartering tailwind degraded the airplane™s climb performance during takeoff.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s failure to establish a proper airspeed during takeoff with the airplane near its 
maximum gross weight and with a quartering tailwind.
Page 2 of 6CEN15LA335
Findings
Aircraft
Takeoff distance - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Climb rate - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Maximum weight - Not specified (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of checklist - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Tailwind - Effect on operation (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN15LA335
Factual Information
On August 1, 2015, at 1340 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-502B airplane, N502LH, 
impacted terrain after departure from the private Holzwarth Flying Service Airport, near 
Virden, Illinois. The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured. The 
airplane sustained substantial damage. The airplane was registered to and operated by C & L 
Holzwarth Inc., Virden, Illinois, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
137 as an aerial application flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan 
was filed. The flight was originating at the time of the accident. 
According to the pilot, the airplane had just been loaded and he was beginning his sixth aerial 
application flight of the day. He noted that during the previous flights the wind was from the 
southwest/southeast and less than 5 knots. Prior to departure, he checked the wind sock which 
indicated the wind was from the southwest. He also checked his handheld GPS which indicated 
the local area winds were mainly from the west at 3-5 knots. The pilot started the takeoff roll 
on the west runway and noted that ¾ of the way down the runway the airspeed had not yet 
reached takeoff speed. He jettisoned some of the load in order to clear the corn at the west end 
of the runway. When the airplane cleared the corn, the pilot ceased the jettison. The airplane 
began to descend so the pilot resumed jettisoning the load. The airplane continued to descend, 
made a hard left bank and impacted the ground. The pilot reported that there were no 
mechanical malfunctions with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation. 
The pilot returned to the airport by car 15 minutes after the accident and checked the wind 
sock which revealed the wind was from the southeast. The pilot was uncertain if the wind 
shifted during the accident takeoff roll. 
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector confirmed substantial 
damage to the fuselage, both wings and empennage. The airplane came to rest in the corn field; 
it faced 180 degrees from the direction of departure heading and 1,200 feet from the end of the 
runway. Witnesses confirmed that immediately after the accident the wind was from the 
southeast about 6 knots. Also, the airplane was being operated within the weight limits. The 
maximum hopper load was 4,100 lbs; the hopper weight was 3,897.42 lbs. The maximum 
aircraft gross weight was 9,400 lbs; the actual airplane gross weight was 9,367 lbs. 
The airport was equipped with a single asphalt runway, 2,640 ft by 100 ft, oriented on a 
magnetic heading of 090 and 270.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Loss of lift (Defining event)
Other weather encounter
Attempted remediation/recovery
Loss of control in flight
Page 4 of 6CEN15LA335
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
60
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/18/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/17/2014
Flight Time:
11710 hours (Total, all aircraft), 430 hours (Total, this make and model), 11576 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 290 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 137 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AIR TRACTOR INC
Registration:
N502LH
Model/Series:
AT 502B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
502B-2693
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/28/2015, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
2254 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-34A
Registered Owner:
C & L HOLZWARTH INC
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
C & L HOLZWARTH INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Agricultural Aircraft (137)
Page 5 of 6CEN15LA335
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
VIRDEN, IL (25IL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
VIRDEN, IL (25IL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1340 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
HOLZWARTH FLYING SERVICE (25IL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
680 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2640 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
39.516667, -89.876111 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua D Lindberg
Adopted Date:
01/05/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Stanley Swank; FAA; Springfield, IL
Publish Date:
01/05/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91708
Page 6 of 6CEN15LA335
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
