According to the pilot, while the airplane was descending on final approach, the throttle 
control became unresponsive. Although multiple settings were attempted, the engine remained 
at idle rpm, and the pilot made a forced landing on a road. The airplane collided with a 
lightpost and sustained substantial damage to the fuselage. Although initial examination of the 
engine did not reveal any preimpact mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation, further examination revealed that the throttle cable had separated from its 
housing/end fitting. As a result, the throttle cable could not actuate the carburetor control, and 
the engine remained at idle rpm. A review of the airframe and engine logbooks revealed that 
the throttle cable was not maintained correctly and was never maintained in accordance with 
the manufacturer™s service manual.
The separation of the throttle cable from its fitting, which resulted in an inability to control 
engine power. Contributing to the accident was the inadequate maintenance by the owner.
On November 1, 2011, at 1735 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N739JN, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power while on final 
approach to Pompano Beach Airpark (PMP), Pompano Beach, Florida. The certificated 
commercial pilot and one passenger reported minor injuries. The personal flight was operating 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from Fort Lauderdale 
Executive Airport (FXE), Fort Lauderdale, Florida, at 1730.
The pilot stated that he was descending on final approach to land, when the throttle control 
became unresponsive. He made attempts to change the engine power setting, but no change in 
power occurred. The engine remained at idle speed as the airplane continued to descend. He 
made a forced landing on a road and the airplane collided with a light post.
Post accident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Inspector revealed that the 
fuselage collided with a light post and broke away from the cabin section. The left wing 
outboard section was broken away from the wing assembly at the wing strut. The wreckage was 
recovered and a cursory examination was conducted on the engine. No engine specific 
mechanical anomalies were discovered that would have precluded normal engine operation. 
Further examination revealed that the outer throttle cable housing was separated. When the 
throttle control was moved, it did not actuate the carburetor throttle control. A review of the 
maintenance records did not reveal any recent maintenance to the cable and during the last 
annual inspection no anomalies were noted.
A review of the aircraft and engine logbooks revealed that the throttle cable was not replaced or 
inspected within the last 2512.9 hours. A review of the Cessna model 172 service manual states, 
on page 2-42, item J: ﬁEngine controls and linkage-check general condition, freedom of 
movement through full range. Check for proper travel, security of attachment, and evidence of 
special inspections legends, part E; states, ﬁLubricate each 50 hours, these controls are not 
repairable and should be replaced every 1,500 hours or whenever maximum linear movement 
exceeds .050 inches.ﬂ 
