Page 1 of 2CEN18FA001
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Midland, MI
Accident Number:
CEN18FA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2017, 1447 EDT 
Registration:
N2284U
Aircraft:
BRANTLY B 2B
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On October 1, 2017, at 1447 eastern daylight time, a Brantly B-2B helicopter, N2284U, was 
substantially damaged during landing in an open field near Midland, Michigan. The pilot 
sustained fatal injuries and the passenger sustained minor injuries. The helicopter was 
registered to Attitude Toys, Inc. and operated by the pilot as a 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 
Part 91 personal flight. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The flight was not 
operated on a flight plan. The local flight originated from the same open field shortly before the 
accident.
A witness reported flying with the accident pilot from the Jack Barstow Airport (KIKW), about 
10 miles east-northeast from the accident site, earlier in the day. The pilot landed near the 
southwest corner of the field in order to attend a family gathering at a home adjoining the field. 
This witness stated that some minor turbulence was encountered, but that the flight was 
otherwise uneventful.
The passenger stated that during the gathering, he decided to take a flight around the field with 
the pilot. He recalled that the helicopter "shook" a little on takeoff, which he thought was 
related to local winds. He noted that the tail of the helicopter started to "sway" as they flew 
over the house located along the east edge of the field, but that the pilot subsequently steadied 
the helicopter. Near the northeast corner of the field, the helicopter began descending, slowly 
at first and then more rapidly. He again attributed this to local wind conditions. The rotor 
speed increased, but the helicopter impacted the ground and subsequently rolled onto its left 
side before coming to rest. He added that the engine did not quit and that he turned it off with 
the ignition/magneto key after the accident.
The field was about 900 feet (north to south) by 800 feet (east to west). The accident flight 
departed from near the southwest corner of the field. The home the helicopter flew over was 
located along the eastern edge of the field, about 300 feet from the northern boundary. The 
accident site was located at the north boundary of the field, which was about 0.16 mile north-
northeast from the departure point. The helicopter came to rest on its left side oriented on a 
northwesterly bearing.
Page 2 of 2CEN18FA001
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BRANTLY
Registration:
N2284U
Model/Series:
B 2B B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KIW, 635 ft msl
Observation Time:
1453 EDT
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 1°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
3 knots / , 170°
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.27 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Midland, MI (N/A)
Destination: 
Midland, MI (N/A)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
43.623889, -84.470556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven D Betzer; FAA Flight Standards; Grand Rapids, MI
J. Mike Childers; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
