Page 1 of 3WPR18FA001
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Klamath Falls, OR
Accident Number:
WPR18FA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2017, 1043 PDT 
Registration:
N6083D
Aircraft:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On October 1, 2017, about 1043 Pacific daylight time, a Cirrus Design Corp SR22, N6083D, was 
destroyed after impacting terrain while maneuvering at a low altitude in a remote mountainous 
area about 24 nautical miles west-northwest of Klamath Falls, Oregon. The private pilot and 
the sole passenger received fatal injuries. The airplane was registered to Cascade Forestry Inc., 
Gold Hill, Oregon. Instrument meteorological conditions were reported in the area at the time 
of the accident. The personal cross-country flight was being operated in accordance with 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed. The flight departed Crater 
Lake-Klamath Regional Airport (LMT), Klamath Falls, Oregon, at about 1030, with the 
destination being Rouge Valley International-Medford Airport (MFR), Medford, Oregon.
In a postaccident interview with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), a local Oregon State Trooper, who was conducting fish and 
wildlife surveillance in the area at the time of the accident, reported hearing the airplane pass 
overhead near his location. The trooper stated that the airplane was on a westerly heading at a 
very low altitude, in the clouds, "the engine was screaming," and that the clouds at the time 
were at tree-top level. The trooper further reported that as the airplane passed over his position 
it started a turn to the left, and continued to turn left with the "engine still screaming." This 
was followed shortly by the sound of a crash. The trooper opined that he and another trooper 
began searching for the downed airplane, however, by this time the clouds were at ground 
level, which hindered the ability to locate the airplane. The airplane was subsequently located 
the following morning on a ridge populated by thick tree growth and other vegetation.
In a postaccident interview with the NTSB IIC, an acquaintance of the accident pilot reported 
that he had spoken with the pilot at LMT prior to his departure for MFR on the morning of the 
accident. The acquaintance, who is a retired US Air Force F-15 pilot, stated that he had pointed 
out the clouds to the west, which were in the same direction that the accident pilot would be 
taking to MFR. The pilot replied that if he needed to, he would climb above the clouds and look 
for a hole to get down through. If he could not find a hole, then he would return to LMT.
On October 3rd and 4th, representatives from the NTSB, the Federal Aviation Administration, 
Continental Motors, Inc., and Cirrus Aircraft surveyed the accident site. The airplane had 
initially impacted a 40-foot tall tree at about the 25-foot level on a northeast heading, then 
Page 2 of 3WPR18FA001
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
impacted the base of a second tree. It then continued northeast on about a 15° downslope 
before coming to rest about 100 ft. from the initial impact point. The airplane was highly 
fragmented during the accident sequence.
All airplane flight control surfaces were accounted for at the accident site. The airplane's 
parachute system was observed to have separated from its secured location by impact forces, 
and was unfurled and located about 40 ft. northeast of the main wreckage and in line with the 
linear debris path; the parachute rocket motor had not discharged. There was no postcrash fire. 
The wreckage was recovered from the accident site to a secured storage facility for further 
examination.
At 1053, the weather reporting facility at LMT, located about 24 nm east-southeast of the 
accident site, reported wind 310° at 9 knots (kts), gusts to 16 kts, visibility 10 miles, overcast 
clouds at 4,500 ft., temperature 11° C, dew point -01° C, and an altimeter setting of 30.14 
inches of mercury.
At 1053, the weather reporting facility at MFR, located about 27 nm west-southwest of the 
accident site reported wind calm, visibility 10 miles, scattered clouds at 3,400 ft., broken 
clouds at 6,000 ft., temperature 14° C, dew point 6° C. and an altimeter setting of 30.19 inches 
of mercury.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration:
N6083D
Model/Series:
SR22 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LMT, 4095 ft msl
Observation Time:
1053 PDT
Distance from Accident Site:
24 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / -1°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Partial Obscuration 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
9 knots / 16 knots, 310°
Lowest Ceiling:
Obscured 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Klamath Falls, OR (LMT)
Destination: 
Medford, OR (MFR)
Page 3 of 3WPR18FA001
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
42.253611, -122.265556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Additional Participating Persons:
Richard Chagnon; Federal Aviation Administration; Hillsboro, OR
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
