The pilot stated that the pitot heat system was working during preflight. He obtained a full 
weather briefing from flight service, and checked the weather via the internet before departing.  
While airborne at 6,000 feet to 6,500 feet mean sea level he encountered instrument 
meteorological conditions and turned on the pitot heat.  Sometime later, the airplane 
encountered moderate icing conditions.  The airspeed indicator stopped working and the pilot 
diverted from his route of flight to an alternate airport.  While over the runway on landing 
approach, the airplane stalled and landed hard, substantially damaging the airplane.  Ice was 
found at the impact site, on the airplanes surfaces, and in the pitot tube. Inspection of the pitot 
tube revealed the pitot heat was not functioning at the pitot tube. On the day of the accident 
there were two AIRMETs for moderate icing in effect for the pilot™s route of flight and altitude.  
The pilot could not recall being informed of the icing conditions during his weather briefing 
and his briefing from flight service could not be located.
The failure of the pitot heat system in icing conditions resulting in an inoperative airspeed 
indicator which led to an inadvertant stall while on final approach. Contributing to the accident 
was the pilot's decision to fly into known icing conditions.
On December 6, 2009, at 1415 central standard time, a Beech V35 airplane, N108L, was 
substantially damaged during landing at Dodge City Regional Airport (DDC), Dodge City, 
Kansas. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed. The commercial pilot and passenger 
were not injured.  The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 with an Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) flight plan.  The 
cross-country flight originated at the Anoka County-Blaine Airport (ANE), Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, and was en route to Dalhart Municipal Airport (DHT), Dalhart, Texas.  
The pilot obtained a telephone weather brief from flight service, filed an IFR flight plan, and 
checked the weather on the internet prior to departing ANE.  The pilot stated that during 
preflight inspection the pitot heat was checked and was working.  The pilot departed ANE 
under visual flight rules and climbed to 6,500 feet mean sea level (MSL).  After about one and a 
half hours of flight the pilot encountered IFR conditions, obtained an IFR clearance, and 
descended to 6,000 feet MSL.  The pilot reported the airspeed indicator stopped working so he 
elected to divert to DDC, which was the nearest airport with an ILS approach.  While over the 
runway on landing approach the airplane ﬁfell straight downﬂ and landed hard.
There are three types of AIRMETs for different weather conditions, each represented by a 
phonetic letter. AIRMETs ZULU (Z) indicate widespread areas of moderate icing.  There were 
two AIRMET ZULU™s in effect for the pilot™s intended route of flight from 0845 to 1500.  One 
indicated moderate ice below 15,000 feet MSL, and the other indicated moderate ice below 
10,000 feet MSL.
On the Safety Board Form 6120.1, Accident/Incident Report, the pilot marked Automated 
Report as his source of weather information, Telephone/Computer as the method of briefing, 
and Full for briefing type/completeness.  The pilot noted on the Safety Board Form 6120.1 that 
an Airmen's Meteorological Information (AIRMET) for instrument meteorological conditions 
(IFR) was in effect at the time of the accident and he told the investigator he could not recall 
being briefed on the icing conditions.  Investigators were unable to obtain a copy of the actual 
briefing provided to the pilot to verify what he had been briefed.
Beechcraft Bonanza V35, V35A (D-7977 thru D-9068) and V35B (D-9069 thru D-9947) Pilot™s 
Operating Handbook (POH/AFM, P/N 35-590118-31B4) states:
WARNING
FLIGHT IN ICING CONDITIONS IS PROHIBITED
ICING CONDITIONS
Flight in Icing Conditions Is Prohibited
Don™t fly in possible icing conditions
Examination of the airplane revealed all three landing gear collapsed, both wing spars bent, 
and the left main gear penetrated the top of the left wing.  Ice was found on the surfaces of the 
airplane and on the ground near the impact point.  Initial post accident inspection of the pitot 
heat system showed the pitot heat switch was in the on position and ice was found in the pitot 
tube.  Power was applied to the airplane, but no heat was detected at the pitot tube.  The pitot 
tube was removed from the airplane by investigators and electrical power was applied directly 
to the unit.  No heat was detected from the pitot tube.  The airspeed indicator was examined 
and found to work normally. An examination of the remaining systems revealed no anomalies.
