The Ground Control East (GCE) controller cleared Fire 2, an airport ground vehicle, to cross 
runway 21R at taxiway F in front of Pinnacle Airlines (FLG) flight 3720, a departing regional 
jet.  According to crew statements, FLG3720 rotated normally and was about 150 feet above 
ground level when it passed the intersection of the runway and taxiway F.  There was no 
damage to either the aircraft or the fire truck, and no reported injuries.
The Local Control East (LCE) controller cleared FLG3720 into position to hold on runway 21R 
at 1019:33, and was cleared for takeoff about a minute later.  At 1020:29, Fire 2 contacted the 
GCE controller with a request, but the GCE controller could not understand the transmission 
and asked Fire 2 to repeat his request.  Fire 2 responded, "I™m at Station 100 like [taxiway] 
Fox[trot] over to the [runway] 3L deice pad."  The GCE controller replied, "Approved as 
requested."  At 1021:35, Fire 2 reported clear of runway 3L.  At 1021:43, GCE transmitted, 
"–you said the [runway] 22R deice pad."  Fire 2 replied, "No, I said the [runway] 3L, sir."
DTW airport was equipped with an ASDE-X ground movement radar system that provided 
aircraft and vehicle tracking capabilities as well as conflict detection.  According to recorded 
data, the system detected a conflict between Fire 2 and FLG3720 at 1021:25, just before Fire 2 
entered the runway.  Fire 2 completed crossing the runway and exited at taxiway F at 1021:32.  
FLG3720 passed taxiway F at 1021:37. 
The ground controller was still in training, and was still in the process of being certified on all 
control positions in the tower.  The day before the incident, he had been certified on the two 
east ground control positions by a supervisor. His certification occurred on the evening shift 
and took about an hour. The ground controller acknowledged that during his training he had 
received various comments from his instructors about scanning the airport surface, but he 
stated that generally they were "hit and miss" issues and did not reflect consistent deficiencies. 
The supervisor said that there were no unusual conditions to help explain what had occurred.  
There was no construction in progress, no weather affecting the airport, no rain, and no 
distractions.  Some aircraft had controlled departure times that needed to be assigned. 
However, this did not affect the operation of the time.  
Page 2 of 8OPS10IA003
Since the incursion, the instructor provided some advice to the ground controller about control 
techniques that might help prevent him from encountering a similar problem in the future, in 
particular, discontinuing use of the phraseology, "proceed as requested."  Issuance of specific 
instructions to a pilot or vehicle operator may result in a correction or other feedback from the 
operator. However, the instructor further noted that requiring controllers to always read back 
the entire request from a vehicle operator or pilot may result in lengthy, but unnecessary 
exchanges on the radio.
The ground controller did not monitor the progress of the fire truck to ensure that the driver 
followed the expected route.  A contributing factor was the ground controller's 
misunderstanding of the fire truck driver's requested destination on the airport.
On December 4, 2009, an operational error / runway incursion occurred at Detroit 
Metropolitan Wayne County Airport (DTW), Detroit, Michigan when Fire 2, an airport ground 
vehicle, was cleared to cross runway 21R at taxiway F in front of Pinnacle Airlines (FLG) flight 
3720, a departing regional jet.  According to crew statements, FLG3720 rotated normally and 
was about 150 feet above ground level when it passed the intersection of the runway and 
taxiway F.  There was no damage to either the aircraft or the fire truck, and no reported 
injuries.
The Local Control East (LCE) controller cleard FLG3720 into position to hold on runway 21R 
at 1019:33, and was cleared for takeoff about a minute later.  
At 1020:29, Fire 2 contacted the Ground Control East (GCE) controller with a request, but the 
GCE controller could not understand the transmission and at 1520:45 asked Fire 2 to repeat 
his request.  Fire 2 responded, "I™m at Station 100 like [taxiway] Fox[trot] over to the [runway] 
3L deice pad."  The GCE controller replied, "Approved as requested."
At 1021:35, Fire 2 reported clear of runway 3L.  At 1021:43, GCE transmitted, "–you said the 
[runway] 22R deice pad."  Fire 2 replied, "No, I said the [runway] 3L, sir."
At 1022:07, LCE instructed FLG3720 to contact departure, adding, "–and we do apologize for 
that Œ we™ll take care of the problem."  FLG3720 responded, "–no worries" and left the 
frequency.
DTW airport was equipped with an ASDE-X ground movement radar system that provided 
aircraft and vehicle tracking capabilities as well as conflict detection.  According to recorded 
data, the system detected a conflict between Fire 2 and FLG3720 at 1021:25, just before Fire 2 
entered the runway.  Fire 2 completed crossing the runway and exited at taxiway F at 1021:32.  
FLG3720 passed taxiway F at 1021:37. 
After the incident, the Pinnacle Airlines flight operations department contacted the pilot of 
FLG3720 to obtain further information.  The captain reported, "DTW Tower cleared us for 
takeoff on RWY 21R.  We lifted-off normally but as we were climbing out, I saw a DTW Rescue 
Fire vehicle pass from right to left across our runway well beyond our liftoff point and further 
down the runway.  Fortunately, our aircraft did not have to take evasive action. Our climbout 
and flight to [Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport] was normal."
The ground controller entered on duty with the FAA on August 18, 2008, and came to Detroit 
tower in November 2008 after completing training at the FAA Academy. He did not have any 
prior military controller experience or pilot licenses. His medical certificate had a restriction 
for corrective lenses for distant vision, and he was wearing contacts on the day of the incident.
The ground controller was still in training, and was still in the process of being certified on all 
control positions in the tower.  The day before the incident, he had been certified on the two 
east ground control positions by a supervisor. His certification occurred on the evening shift 
and took about an hour. He stated that he was comfortable being certified on the positions, and 
that he had sufficient training time before certification. There were some deicing operations in 
progress during the incident shift, and he stated that he had encountered deicing operations 
earlier in his training so was familiar with them. 
The ground controller acknowledged that during his training he had received various 
comments from his instructors about scanning the airport surface, but he stated that generally 
they were "hit and miss" issues and did not reflect consistent deficiencies. 
The ground controller stated that he initially became aware of Fire 2 when he looked down in 
response to the driver™s call and saw the vehicle holding outside the fire station at the edge of 
taxiway F.  He stated that the driver™s initial transmission was garbled. He asked the driver to 
repeat his transmission, and thought he had asked to go to the runway 22L deice pad via 
taxiway F. The ground controller replied ﬁproceed as requestedﬂ and moved on to other 
activities. He looked at the sequence of aircraft on taxiway M, then looked over to the south 
end of the terminal for aircraft moving in that area, and then checked his flight progress strip 
box for additional flight strips on upcoming aircraft. He heard the ASDE-X alert and looked up 
to see Fire 2 on the runway, and the Pinnacle Airlines flight rotating for takeoff. The supervisor 
asked him to confirm Fire 2™s destination on the airport and he did so.
When asked what, if anything, he would do differently in this situation, the ground controller 
stated that he would have watched the fire vehicle longer to ensure that the driver turned in the 
correct direction, issued a specific route, or restated the driver's destination on the airport to 
prevent misunderstanding. He had been trained that if a vehicle operator states the 
appropriate route and destination on the airport, it was acceptable to respond with "proceed as 
requested." After this incident, the ground controller stated that he will begin issuing specific 
clearances, handling vehicles the same way as he handles aircraft, and will monitor vehicle 
progress along their routes better.
He described his training for ground control as consisting of four weeks of classroom training, 
including 20 hours of computer-based instruction, 40 hours of lab time, 40 hours of self-study, 
and about 40 hours of classroom instruction. Topics covered included airport layout, taxiways, 
runways, terminals, ILS critical areas, FAA order 7110.65 requirements, letters of agreement, 
local procedures, taxi routes, departure sequencing, fixes, headings used on different traffic 
flow plans, and which departure controllers are responsible for which fixes. In lab exercises, 
trainees used newly created or previously used flight strips, and a tabletop model of the airport 
along with model aircraft. Developmental controllers were trained on various scenarios 
involving taxi routes, fixes, etc.
The supervisor on duty when the incursion occurred entered on duty with the FAA on 
November 15, 1983, became a controller at DTW in 1991, and became a supervisor in 1997. She 
maintained currency on all positions in the tower cab, and worked at least eight hours of 
currency time on position every month.
Besides being present during the incident, she was also the ground controller's supervisor of 
record and was heavily involved in his training. She described him as an excellent trainee, and 
said that she had received good reports about his performance from other supervisors.
The supervisor reported no pressure from anyone to push developmental controllers through 
the training program. In November 2009, after the ground controller had been training on the 
GCE positions, she began to think about certifying him to work the positions alone. It is her 
policy to not certify a developmental unless and until the primary and secondary instructors 
say that the developmental is ready. She consulted with the ground controller's primary and 
secondary instructors, and both of them advised her that they believed he was ready for 
certification. On Thursday, December 3, 2009 the supervisor performed a certification skill 
check on the ground controller covering the GCE positions. It lasted about an hour, which she 
said is unusually long for a certification check. The developmental passed the check, and she 
certified him to work the positions alone that afternoon about 4:10. She stated that she had 
absolutely no concerns about his ability to work the positions and was entirely comfortable in 
certifying him to do so.
On December 4, the day of the incident, the supervisor came to work at 1000. The operational 
error occurred at 1021. She had completed some initial administrative duties and was at the 
supervisor position in the tower monitoring the operation. She heard the local controller 
instruct FLG3720 to taxi into position and hold on runway 21R.  She stood up to watch the 
local controller clear the aircraft for takeoff and ensure that he scanned the runway when he 
did so. The ground controller was standing just to the left of the local controller. The supervisor 
sat down at her desk, and then heard the ASDE-X alarm go off. She stood up again and looked 
at runway 21R.  She saw a large yellow fire truck crossing the runway, with a Pinnacle Airlines 
aircraft departing over the fire truck. She recognized that an operational error had occurred, 
and called the break room for two controllers to come to the cab so that she could get the 
ground and local controllers off position. She also contacted the quality assurance department 
to advise them that a runway incursion had occurred and ask them to pull the tapes on the 
incident. She got the two controllers relief, and then went to the quality assurance department 
to help get the inital report completed.
The supervisor said that there were no unusual conditions to help explain what had occurred.  
There was no construction in progress, no weather affecting the airport, no rain, and no 
distractions.  Some aircraft had controlled departure times that needed to be assigned. 
However, this did not affect the operation of the time.  She stated, "I have absolutely no 
explanation for what happened."
Asked how often the phraseology "proceed as requested" is used, the supervisor stated that it is 
not common. Use of that phraseology was restricted by a memo requiring issuance of specific 
routes to aircraft and vehicles even when the desired route was stated by the vehicle or aircraft 
operator at the time of the request. She had been off-duty on leave for the since the incursion 
occurred, so she was uncertain whether the facility has taken any follow-up actions related to 
the incident.
Asked to explain control procedures for fire trucks operating on the airport, the supervisor 
stated that the fire truck operators call the tower, state where they are, and describe what they 
want to do. They always call when they want to go onto the movement area. She noted that 
heavily loaded fire trucks often cannot use the access roads in non-movement areas because of 
their weight, and must travel on the taxiways or cross runways to move around the airport.
The on-the-job-training instructor who provided most of the ground controller's training 
described him as very sharp and noted that he has been doing ﬁreally wellﬂ in training. He was 
very complimentary of the ground controller's overall performance, stating, "...I'm happy to be 
his trainer. He's good."
Since the incursion, the instructor provided some advice to the ground controller about control 
techniques that might help prevent him from encountering a similar problem in the future, in 
particular, discontinuing use of the phraseology, "proceed as requested."  Issuance of specific 
instructions to a pilot or vehicle operator may result in a correction or other feedback from the 
operator. However, the instructor further noted that requiring controllers to always read back 
the entire request from a vehicle operator or pilot may result in lengthy, but unnecessary 
exchanges on the radio.
Asked about the movement of fire trucks on the airport, the instructor stated that the fire truck 
drivers always call the tower when they need to enter a movement area.
