National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LINCOLN, NE
Accident Number: CHI00LA197
Date & Time: 07/01/2000, 2000 CDT
Registration: N6432M
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot was practicing landings solo when the accident occurred.
According to a statement by the student pilot, 'When I flared the airplane floated and I relaxed the yoke to level it back with the runway then suddenly plane hit the ground hard and bounced back in the air.
That totally got me by surprise.
After that plane bounced 2-3 more times and settled back on the runway.
After that I heard rattling sounds as plane rolled on the runway.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the misjudged flare and the inadequate recovery from the bounced landing performed by the student pilot.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and was not operating on a flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The student pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight departed LNK at 1915 CDT.
In a written statement, the pilot stated, "I was approaching runway 17L for my second touch and go that evening.
There was no wind or any other kind of weather hazard.
I had already set up the plane in landing configuration.
Flaps were fully down, airplane was aligned with the runway centerline, airspeed indicator showing between 60 and 65 knots.
I was going to make a routine landing, or so I thought.
When I flared the airplane floated and I relaxed the yoke to level it back with the runway then suddenly plane hit the ground hard and bounced back in the air.
That totally got me by surprise.
After that plane bounced 2-3 more times and settled on the runway.
After that I heard rattling sounds as plane rolled on the runway.
Thinking that something was wrong I asked control tower's permission to taxi back to ramp.
When I got out of the plane I noticed that front tire was flat and bearings had come loose around the nose wheel axle."
A post accident examination of the aircraft revealed damage to the firewall.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 25, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
