National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GODLEY, TX
Accident Number: FTW00LA191
Date & Time: 07/01/2000, 1630 CDT
Registration: N231RR
Aircraft: Mooney M20K
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot, who is also an aircraft mechanic, had just completed a 100-hour inspection on his airplane, and he inadvertently left the magneto P-leads disconnected.
While in cruise flight, the engine lost power, and the pilot made a successful emergency landing in a field.
The pilot stated that he reconnected the P-leads, checked the magnetos, and attempted a takeoff from the field.
He stated that the acceleration was 'normal;' however, when the airplane lifted off of the ground it 'skipped and settled two or three times.'
The pilot aborted the takeoff 'too late to keep from plowing through some small trees.'
The pilot stated that he misjudged the distance required to takeoff from the soft field.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight planning and his delay in aborting the takeoff.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 1.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On July 1, 2000, at 1630 central daylight time, a Mooney M20K airplane, N231RR, was substantially damaged when it impacted a fence and trees during takeoff from a field near Godley, Texas.
The commercial pilot, who was the registered owner of the airplane and the sole occupant, received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The flight originated from Cleburne, Texas, at 1600, and was destined for Fort Worth, Texas.
According to a written statement provided by the pilot, who is also an aircraft mechanic, he had just completed a 100-hour inspection on his airplane and "inadvertently left the magneto 'P' leads disconnected after the mag[neto] check."
The pilot stated that he experienced a loss of engine power while en route to Fort Worth and performed a successful emergency landing in a field.
The pilot stated that he "reconnected the 'P' leads, checked the mag[netos] and attempted a takeoff-estimating that I had plenty of takeoff distance."
He reported that the wind was calm and the fuel tanks were almost full.
He added that the ground was slightly soft.
The pilot stated that the acceleration was "normal;" however, when the airplane lifted off of the ground it "skipped and settled two or three times."
The pilot aborted the takeoff "too late to keep from plowing through some small trees."
The pilot reported that he "misjudged the distance required on the (slightly) soft field."
The FAA inspector stated that the left wing was separated from the airplane and the right wing was structurally damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Flight Engineer Age: 61, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
