National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TULSA, OK
Accident Number: FTW00LA197
Date & Time: 07/01/2000, 0845 CDT
Registration: N6402G
Aircraft: Bushby MIDGET MUSTANG
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During a high speed, low pass over the runway, the pilot heard a loud 'bang' and felt the airplane vibrate.
He declared an emergency, and executed a precautionary landing to a grass field near the south end of the airport.
During the landing, the left wing contacted a fence, and the airplane spun around 180 degrees collapsing the right main landing gear.
Examination of the airplane revealed the propeller spinner separated in flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The in-flight separation of the propeller spinner.
A factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the precautionary landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: PROPELLER FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) PROPELLER SYSTEM/ACCESSORIES,SPINNER - SEPARATION ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 3.
OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On July 1, 2000, at 0845 central daylight time, a Bushby Midget Mustang amateur-built experimental airplane, N6402G, was substantially damaged when it impacted a fence during a precautionary landing at the Richard Lloyd Jones Jr. Airport near Tulsa, Oklahoma.
The aircraft was registered to and operated by the pilot.
The private pilot, who was the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The local flight departed the Richard Lloyd Jones Jr. Airport at an unknown time.
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB From 6120.1/2), the pilot was approved by air traffic control for a high speed, low pass over runway 19L.
As the airplane neared the end of the runway, the pilot heard a loud "bang" and felt the airplane vibrate.
He declared an emergency, and executed a precautionary landing to a grass field near the south end of the airport.
During the landing, the left wing contacted a fence, and the airplane spun around 180 degrees collapsing the right main landing gear.
The pilot stated that "inspection showed spinner broke and hit prop - not engine failure."
According to the FAA inspector, who examined the airplane in a hanger, the propeller spinner separated in flight.
Examination of the aircraft revealed that the fuselage was twisted, and the left wing tip fuel tank and left wing tip were separated from the left wing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 10 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: O-200 Registered Owner: EARL D. PITTINGER JR.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
