National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: JACKPOT, NV
Accident Number: LAX00LA248
Date & Time: 07/01/2000, 1315 PDT
Registration: N600SE
Aircraft: KASHAN MICHAEL BERKUT 540
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis On short final, the airplane rolled over and crashed on the side of the runway.
The pilot of the airplane that landed ahead of the accident airplane observed numerous dust devils and gusty winds in the airport vicinity and broadcast an advisory about the conditions.
Thunderstorms were in the area, and the winds were 10 to 15 knots and swirling.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's loss of control on landing after encountering a dust devil/whirlwind.
Findings Occurrence #1: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - DUST DEVIL/WHIRLWIND 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On July 1, 2000, about 1315 hours Pacific daylight time, an experimental Kashan Berkut 540, N600SE, sustained substantial damage when it rolled over and touched down inverted during landing at Hayden Field, Jackpot, Nevada.
The private pilot operated the borrowed airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot and one passenger sustained serious injuries.
The local personal flight, which was participating in an experimental airplane fly-in, departed Jackpot at an unknown time.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot told a Sheriff's deputy the wind flipped him over when he was on short final.
The pilot of the airplane ahead of the accident airplane told the deputy he observed numerous dust devils and gusty winds in the airport vicinity and broadcast an advisory about the conditions.
The deputy said thunderstorms were in the area, and the winds were 10 to 15 knots and swirling.
A Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, Form 6120.1/2, was sent via certified mail and not returned.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
