National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FORT WAYNE, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA219
Date & Time: 07/01/2000, 1645 EST
Registration: N521MC
Aircraft: McCann WHEELER EXPRESS/FT
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was landing when it ran off the end of the runway and struck a parked airplane and the airport perimeter fence.
The pilot said that, "after touchdown I tapped [the] brakes lightly and got no response.
I applied heavier pressure but got no brakes other than very light response."
The airplane went off the end of the runway and across the parking ramp striking a parked airplane and the airport perimeter fence.
The parked airplane received minor damage to the left aileron.
A postaccident examination revealed that the brake travel was restricted by a support bar installed above the brake pedals.
No other anomalies were found that could be associated with a preexisting condition.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the obstructed brake pedals and the unavailable brakes to the pilot.
Factors were the parked airplane and the fence.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL BRAKE SYSTEM - OBSTRUCTED 2.
(C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - NOT AVAILABLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) OBJECT - AIRCRAFT PARKED/STANDING 4.
The personal flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported no injuries to himself or his one passenger.
The flight departed the Allen County Airport, Iola, Kansas at 1330.
In a written statement the pilot said that, "after touchdown I tapped [the] brakes lightly and got no response.
I applied heavier pressure but got no brakes other than very light response."
The airplane went off the end of the runway and across the parking ramp striking a parked airplane and the airport perimeter fence.
The parked airplane received minor damage to the left aileron.
A postaccident examination by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector revealed that a support bar installed above the brake pedals could restrict the brake travel.
The inspector said that this condition was noticed when his feet were raised about 2 inches above the cockpit floor.
No other anomalies were found that could be associated with a preexisting condition.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 65, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
