While en route to his destination, the 170-hour non-instrument rated private pilot encountered 
adverse weather conditions and elected to perform a precautionary landing in an open field.  
During the landing roll, the airplane collided with a barbed-wire fence, nosed over, and came to 
rest in the inverted position.  The pilot had not obtained a weather briefing; however, he had 
obtained some weather information on the internet from DUATS.
The pilot's improper weather evaluation, and his encounter with adverse weather conditions.  
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the precautionary landing.
On March 2, 2004, approximately 1730 central standard time, a Piper PA-38-112 single-engine 
airplane, N2588A, was substantially damaged when it impacted a barbed-wire fence following 
a precautionary landing near Sugar Land, Texas.  The passenger received minor injuries and 
the private pilot was not injured.  The aircraft was owned by King Interests Inc., of Pearland, 
Texas, and operated by King Flight Service of Pearland, Texas.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The 
aircraft departed Victoria Regional Airport (VCT), near Victoria, Texas, at 1600, with a 
destination of Pearland Regional Airport (LVJ), near Houston, Texas.  No flight plan was filed 
for the flight.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the 170-hour 
pilot reported that he did not receive a weather briefieng for the flight; however, he did obtain 
some weather data from the internet on DUATS.  The pilot added that while en route, the 
weather deteriorated and he elected to divert to Houston Southwest Airport (AXH), near 
Houston, Texas.  The pilot added that the weather continued to deteriorate, and he was forced 
to attempt a precautionary landing in a field.  During the landing roll, the aircraft struck a 
barbed-wire fence and came to rest in the inverted position.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed 
structural damage to the right wing spar, the horizontal stabilizer, and fuselage.
The automated surface observing system at Houston Southwest Airport (SGR) at 1753 reported 
the winds at 130 degrees at 11 knots, 7 statute miles visibility, overcast at 1,100 feet msl, 
temperature 22 degrees Celsius, dew point 20 degrees Celsius, and a barometric pressure 
reading of 29.99 inches of Mercury.
The automated surface observing system at Victoria Regional Airport (VCT) at 1751 reported 
the winds at 140 at 10 knots, 9 statute miles visibility, broken at 1,300 feet msl, temperature 22 
degrees Celsius, dew point 21 degrees Celsius, and a barometric pressure reading of 29.96 
inches of Mercury.
