The captain on the United A320 said that during their pushback, a TED A320 was being 
pushed back at an angle from its gate toward their position.  The captain said he relayed his 
concern to the ground crew, but did not receive a clear response.  As the TED A320 
approached, two persons from their push crew ran out, "apparently to get a better view.  Both 
airplanes were finally stopped in close proximity.  We were positioned to the east of our push 
line, toward the other aircraft."  The captain said that he requested that his tug remain in place 
in case they had to return to the gate for a sick passenger.  When it was determined the 
passenger could fly, they started engines and released the pushback crew.  He said the crew 
disconnected and they received a salute and a release from guidance for a left turn out.  The 
captain said the TED A320 was still connected to its tug and one of its ground crew was 
standing to the left front of the airplane facing aft.  "He was looking toward us and holding his 
right hand overhead, and with his left arm out and slightly raised, indicating the wingtip 
clearance distance."  The captain said, "I taxied slowly forward at idle thrust and eased toward 
the left."  After a short distance, the wingtips collided causing minor damage to both airplanes.  
The United first officer said both he and the captain looked at a ground crew member standing 
in front and between the two airplanes, looking at us with wand raised and other arm held out 
horizontally indicating wing clearance.  I called for taxi and we were cleared for a left turn out.  
With wing man guidance and a visual check I told the captain we were cleared on the right.  We 
started to move and I glanced forward.  When I looked back out to the right, the wing walker 
was gone, and then the wingtips made contact.  One of the ground crew members on the TED 
A320 said he was wing walking for the airplane on the first officer's side.  Another ground crew 
member was on the captain's side of the TED A320.  The first ground crew member said the 
other ground crew member stopped the pushback.  He said he went around to see what was 
happening.  As he did, the first ground crew member saw the wings of the two airplanes "about 
20 to 30 feet apart."  The first ground crew member said he looked at the first officer on the 
United A320 and gave him "the hold sign."  He said he then went to the tug operator  to discuss 
the position of the airplane.  As he was talking with the tug operator, the United A320 
proceeded to move and clipped the wing of the TED A320.  United Airlines pushback 
procedures for Gates A46 and A48 at the Denver International Airport cited, "The coordination 
of the pushback must include ... verbal agreement between gate crews ... on which aircraft is 
Page 2 of 5DEN04IA050B
being moved first, [and] continual visual observance of the clearance between aircraft ..." 
the failure of the other flight crew to maintain clearance from the airplane and the ground 
crews failure to follow proper pushback procedures.
SEE FACTUAL NARRATIVE DEN04IA050A.
