A flight attendant suffered a broken ankle and tibia when the airplane encountered turbulence 
during descent.  The captain reported the seat belt sign was turned on as they descended 
through 18,000 feet.  He reported they encountered about 15 seconds of moderate turbulence 
as they passed through 16,000 feet.  He reported there were no weather returns in the area and 
they were back in smooth air after the encounter.  The first officer reported that he informed 
the flight attendants to take their seats as soon as they began to encounter the turbulence.  He 
reported he was getting ready to call the flight attendants after the turbulence to make sure 
they were alright, when the cockpit received a call from the back stating that one of the flight 
attendants injured her ankle.  The first officer reported that they requested paramedics meet 
the flight upon landing.  The injured flight attendant reported she was in the aft galley when 
they encountered the turbulence.  She stated she tried to get in the jumpseat, but was unable to 
because of the turbulence.  The injured flight attendant stated she heard another flight 
attendant tell a passenger who was in the aft galley to sit on the floor, so she decided to do the 
same.  She stated that as she was sitting down, the "plane dropped" and she fell.  Once the 
turbulence subsided, the other flight attendant and a passenger helped her off the floor and 
into a seat.  None of the flight attendants recalled having any advance warning of the 
turbulence.  Rapidly building convective activity was evident along the upper Mississippi Valley 
at the time of the accident.  Convective tops averaging FL250 in the area were moving north-
northeast at 60 knots.  Severe Weather Advisory 15S, valid from 1731 universal coordinated 
time (UTC) to 2301 UTC, covered the route of flight from the Mississippi River to ORD.  The 
severe thunderstorm watch included a forecast for hail, surface wind gusts to 60 knots, 
maximum cloud tops to FL450, and a storm motion vector to 240 degrees at 35 knots.  
Convective Sigmet 25C was valid until 2255UTC.  The Sigmet called for an area of embedded 
thunderstorms moving from 190 degrees at 20 knots.  The thunderstorms had tops to FL300.  
Data from the digital flight data recorder shows the airplane experienced vertical acceleration 
fluctuations from a minimum of 0.437 g's, to a maximum of 1.994 g's, and back to 0.576 g's in 
less then 3 seconds.   
Page 2 of 7CHI04LA084
The unexpected encounter with convective turbulence.
On March 1, 2004, at 1422 central standard time, a Boeing 757-200, N516UA, operated by 
United Airlines as flight 1212 encountered moderate turbulence while in a descent 20 miles 
west-southwest of Janesville, Wisconsin.  One flight attendant suffered a broken ankle and 
tibia during the encounter.  The captain, first officer, 4 flight attendants, and 169 passengers 
were not injured.  The airplane was not damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 121 scheduled, domestic, 
passenger flight was operating in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) at the time.  The 
flight was on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.  The flight originated from the 
Portland International Airport (PDX), Portland, Oregon, at 0915 pacific standard time.  The 
flight continued to its planned destination of Chicago International Airport (ORD), Chicago, 
Illinois, where it landed at 1450.
The captain reported the autopilot was engaged from the time they leveled off after departure 
until reading the final approach fix at ORD.  He reported that when they were about 50 
nautical miles (nm) west of Mason City, Iowa, they were cleared direct to Janesville (JVL), 
Wisconsin.  He stated they noticed lowing visibilities at lower altitudes and cumulus clouds 
building in the distance so they turned on the radar and kept it on until landing.  The captain 
reported they were in instrument conditions between flight level (FL) 260 down to 10,000 feet.  
The captain reported that when they were about 70 nm west of JVL, they were cleared direct to 
JVL which was a course of about 090 degrees.  He reported that when they were about 60 nm 
west of JVL they turned to a heading of 120 degrees to avoid a green cell that had a 1nm yellow 
diameter.   The captain stated they passed south of the cell in smooth air.  He reported that 
when 20 nm west of JVL they were cleared direct to the KRENA intersection.  The captain 
reported the seat belt sign was turned on as they descended through FL180.  He reported they 
encountered about 15 seconds of moderate turbulence as they passed through 16,000 feet.  He 
reported there were no weather returns in the area and they were back in smooth air after the 
encounter.  
The first officer recounted essentially the same events as the captain.  However, he reported 
that he informed the flight attendants to take their seats as soon as they began to encounter the 
turbulence.  He reported he was getting ready to call the flight attendants after the turbulence 
to make sure they were alright, when the cockpit received a call from the back stating that one 
of the flight attendants injured her ankle.  The first officer reported that they requested 
paramedics meet the flight upon landing.    
The injured flight attendant reported she was in the aft galley when they encountered the 
turbulence.  She stated she tried to get in the jumpseat, but was unable to because of the 
turbulence.  The injured flight attendant stated she heard another flight attendant tell a 
passenger who was in the aft galley to sit on the floor, so she decided to do the same.  She 
stated that as she was sitting down the "plane dropped" and she fell.  Once the turbulence 
subsided, the other flight attendant and a passenger helped her off the floor and into a seat.
A flight attendant in the front of the airplane reported she was going to her jumpseat to make a 
public address announcement when they encountered the turbulence.  She stated she flew into 
the air and as she came back down her arm caught on the jumpseat pulling it open.  Another 
flight attendant in the front of the airplane was restrained by a passenger during the turbulence 
encounter.  
None of the flight attendants recalled having any advance warning of the turbulence.
Rapidly building convective activity was evident along the upper Mississippi Valley at the time 
of the accident.  Convective tops averaging FL250 in the area were moving north-northeast at 
60 knots.  
Severe Weather Advisory 15S valid from 1731 universal coordinated time (UTC) to 2301 UTC 
covered the route of flight from the Mississippi River to ORD.  The severe thunderstorm watch 
included a forecast for hail, surface wind gusts to 60 knots, maximum cloud tops to FL450, and 
a storm motion vector to 240 degrees at 35 knots.  
Convective SIGMET 25C was valid until 2255UTC.  The SIGMET called for an area of 
embedded thunderstorms moving from 190 degrees at 20 knots.  The thunderstorms had tops 
to FL300.  
Data from the digital flight data recorder (DFDR) shows the airplane experienced vertical 
acceleration fluctuations from a minimum of 0.437 g's, to a maximum of 1.994 g's, and back to 
0.576 g's in less then 3 seconds.   
