Page 1 of 3CEN18LA251
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Georgetown, TX
Accident Number:
CEN18LA251
Date & Time:
07/02/2018, 1445 CDT 
Registration:
N830J
Aircraft:
Robinson R22
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
On July 2, 2018, about 1445 central daylight time, a Robinson Helicopter Company R-22 Beta 
II helicopter, N830J, sustained substantial damage during a landing after a partial loss of 
engine power in the traffic pattern at Georgetown Municipal Airport (GTU), Georgetown, 
Texas. The left seat commercial pilot and the right seat certificated flight instructor (CFI) 
sustained no injury. The helicopter was registered to and operated by Veracity Aviation, LLC, 
Seguin, Texas under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a visual 
flight rules instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident, and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from GTU about 1400.
In a conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge on July 
5, the CFI reported that the purpose of the local area flight was to conduct CFI training with the 
pilot. The pilot was in the process of working toward achieving his CFI rating. The flight 
initially consisted of maneuvers such as hovering autorotations and rapid decelerations over a 
sod area at the airport. The flight then progressed with stop-and-go landings involving normal 
takeoffs and concluding with normal approaches and steep approaches, while in the right 
traffic pattern for Kilo taxiway. The pilot was on the flight controls, demonstrating and 
explaining the maneuvers to the CFI.
While on the last traffic pattern iteration, on the downwind leg about 500 feet above ground 
level (agl) and about 70 knots, the CFI reported he was visually outside of the helicopter, 
scanning for traffic and clearing the helicopter for the base leg turn when he heard the low 
rotor revolutions per minute (rpm) horn activate. The CFI came on the flight controls and he 
immediately reduced the collective and applied throttle. The CFI heard the low rotor rpm horn 
cease and observed the low rotor rpm light extinguish, while he visually confirmed the engine 
and rotor rpm was about 97%. The CFI began the base leg turn and heard the low rotor rpm 
horn again. The CFI observed the tachometer and noticed that the engine and rotor rpm were 
decaying. The CFI assessed the situation and felt that the engine was not capable of 
maintaining the rotor rpm within safe operating limits and he entered an autorotation. 
The CFI scanned the instruments and observed the airspeed was about 55 knots. He reported 
he could not hear noise emitting from the engine and surmised that the engine had ceased 
producing power. After the entry portion to the flare portion of the autorotation, the CFI 
Page 2 of 3CEN18LA251
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
reported that he was focused on maintaining the rotor rpm and maneuvering the helicopter to 
his selected landing area. About 35 feet agl, he began the flare to reduce the forward airspeed 
and the rate of descent. The helicopter touched down on a yard at a private residence, with a 
small amount of forward airspeed. The skids impacted a concrete driveway at the residence. 
The impact with the driveway resulted in the helicopter pitching nose low with the tail 
elevated, along with a right yaw. Both tail rotor blades impacted the ground, resulting in both 
blades becoming separated from the tail rotor gearbox. The vertical stabilizer sustained 
substantial damage from the ground impact, along with minor damage sustained to the tail 
rotor stinger and skid system. Once the helicopter came to rest, the CFI observed that the 
engine was at idle and performed an emergency shutdown. Both occupants egressed from the 
helicopter without further incident.
The CFI reported that the helicopter had an adequate amount of fuel for the flight and the 
helicopter had no known previous issues with the airframe or engine that would have 
precluded normal operation.
The wreckage was recovered from the private residence to the operator's hangar at GTU for a 
future examination of the helicopter.
The two-seat capacity helicopter, serial number 4236, was built in 2007. The helicopter was 
powered by a 4-cylinder, 145 horsepower Lycoming O-360-J2A carbureted engine.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Robinson
Registration:
N830J
Model/Series:
R22 BETA
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
Veracity Aviation, LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Pilot School (141); 
Agricultural Aircraft (137); 
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KGTU, 787 ft msl
Observation Time:
1937 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
36°C / 18°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 200 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
10 knots / 17 knots, 130°
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Georgetown, TX (GTU)
Destination: 
Georgetown, TX (GTU)
Page 3 of 3CEN18LA251
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
30.679444, -97.678333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael J Hodges
Additional Participating Persons:
Arnold Turner; FAA San Antonio FSDO; San Antonio, TX
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA
Derrick Smith; Veracity Aviation; Seguin, TX
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
