National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MARCO ISLAND, FL
Accident Number: ATL00LA051
Date & Time: 05/02/2000, 1100 EDT
Registration: N1449T
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-140
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the approach to land on runway 17 was normal until the airplane was over the numbers, then the airplane abruptly descended and collided with the runway.
The pilot reported that the airplane bounced twice on the runway, then the propeller struck the runway and the airplane nosed over.
The pilot did not report any mechanical malfunctions or component failures with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper flare and inadequate recovery from a bounced landing, which resulted in a nose over.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The airplane was operated by the pilot, a citizen of Ireland, under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The private pilot and the passenger received minor injuries.
The flight departed from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, at 1000.
The pilot stated that he departed Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport on a pleasure flight to Marco Island Airport.
Upon arriving at the destination airport, the pilot established an approach to land on runway 17.
The approach to land on runway 17 was normal until the airplane was over the numbers, then the airplane abruptly descended and contacted the runway.
The pilot reported that the airplane bounced twice on the runway, then the airplane veered off the runway and nosed over.
The pilot did not report any mechanical malfunctions or component failures with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 20, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 2150 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 5 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 8986 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-360 Registered Owner: MAJOR STRATEGIES, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
