National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NEENAH, WI
Accident Number: CHI00LA130
Date & Time: 05/02/2000, 1020 CDT
Registration: N4956
Aircraft: Grunska KITFOX IV
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane contacted a tree while landing to the east on a private airstrip (2,000 foot x 80 foot wide grass field).
He stated he 'landed short' and added power.
He stated, '...we made the runway easily, but bounced once and headed into a tree.'
The pilot reported the local winds were out of the east at 12 knots.
Inspection of the accident site revealed the airplane traveled off the north side of the airstrip where it contacted a tree.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain driectional control of the airplane while landing.
A factor associated with the accident was the tree that the airplane contacted.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On May 2, 2000, at 1020 central daylight time, a Kitfox IV, N4956, collided with trees following a loss of control while landing on a private airstrip on Neenah, Wisconsin.
The private pilot received a minor injury and the passenger was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The local flight originated at approximately 0930 cdt.
The pilot was landing to the east on a 2,000 foot long, 80 foot wide grass field.
He stated he "landed short" and added power.
He stated, "...we made the runway easily, but bounced once and headed into a tree."
The pilot reported the local winds were out of the east at 12 knots.
Inspection of the accident site revealed the airplane traveled off the north side of the airstrip where it contacted a tree.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
