National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SALEM, OR
Accident Number: SEA00LA079
Date & Time: 05/01/2000, 0818 PDT
Registration: N1143L
Aircraft: MORTON CHRISTAVIA MARK I
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot/builder of the kitplane took off from runway 13 on the aircraft's initial test flight and immediately encountered a nose heavy condition.
He declared an emergency and maneuvered to land on runway 34.
He reported that during his approach the aircraft was controllable as long as power was applied, but on short final he instinctively reduced power and the nose of the aircraft abruptly pitched down.
The aircraft then impacted the ground and slid up onto the runway.
The center of gravity range limits had been calculated by the pilot/builder as between 10.5 to 19.5 inches with the aircraft's empty weight CG at 11.0 inches.
Following the calculations, the pilot/builder changed the aircraft's battery (located forward of the cockpit) which added 7 pounds, and added a new engine exhaust system adding 2-3 additional pounds.
A new CG was not calculated.
Center of gravity calculations based on the earlier weight/CG of the aircraft, including the weight of the pilot and the 96 pounds of fuel also placed the CG 0.5 inch forward of the old forward limit.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot/builder's failure to correct the center of gravity computations after a weight increase.
A contributing factor was the pilot/builder's exceeding the forward CG limit in fuel weight, of which both conditions resulted in a degradation of aircraft control.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - NOT CORRECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The pilot was uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions existed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight, which was a maintenance check flight, was to have been operated under 14CFR91, and originated from McNary Field at 0816.
According to tower personnel, the pilot radioed that the aircraft had a brand new engine installed and was on a maintenance check flight.
Immediately after takeoff from runway 13, the pilot declared an emergency and was cleared to land on runway 34.
The controller reported that on short final the aircraft suddenly pitched nose down and impacted terrain.
Both main landing gear were torn off and slash marks characteristic of propeller strikes were observed in the soil immediately following the initial ground impact.
The pilot reported that he took off from Salem on the initial test flight for the aircraft and experienced a nose-heavy condition during climb out.
He requested immediate clearance to return and land and turned back toward the field.
He reported that he "needed power for control and while trying to make [a] wheel landing contacted [the] ground approximately 200 [feet] short of [the] runway end."
He was unable to recover control prior to the ground impact.
According to the center of gravity (CG) calculations provided by the pilot/builder, the aircraft's empty weight was 1,053 pounds and its arm was 11.0 inches.
The arm for the forward pilot seat was 18 inches and the arm for the forward mounted fuel tank was -15 inches.
The documentation provided also indicated that the forward CG limit was 10.5 inches and the aft limit was 19.5 inches.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot/builder, he reported that after having worked up the basic aircraft CG figures he then made two changes within the aircraft.
The first was the replacement of the aircraft battery with a larger unit weighing 7 pounds more than the former battery.
The battery was located forward of the cockpit.
The second was the replacement of the engine exhaust assembly with a newer, stainless steel system which weighed 2 to 3 pounds more than the former.
These two changes would have changed the aircraft CG, making the aircraft more nose heavy.
The pilot/builder reported on his submitted NTSB Form 6120.1/2 under the "Recommendation" section that "closer attention by [the] builder to COG due to heavier equipment being placed after [the] COG [was] figured - builder's failure to re-work COG figures."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 70, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
