National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DAYTONA BEACH, FL
Accident Number: ATL00LA049
Date & Time: 05/01/2000, 1504 EDT
Registration: N819DH
Aircraft: de Havilland DH-82C  TIGERMOTH
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Reportedly, the pilot completed a preflight  of the airplane and elected to fly the airplane, despite reports that the airplane had been parked on the ramp for about one year.
A witness stated that during the run-up the engine was running very rough.
Shortly after takeoff the engine lost power and the airplane collided with the runway.
The post-flight inspection revealed that the airplane had been fueled with  automotive gasoline.
A visual examination of the fuel supply revealed that the automotive gasoline appeared to be 'stale'.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate pre-flight inspection of the fuel supply that resulted in the loss of engine power due to fuel contamination.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On May 1, 2000, at 1504 eastern daylight time, a DeHavilland DH-82C Tigermoth, N918DH, collided with the ground following a reported loss of engine power during takeoff at Daytona Beach, Florida.
The airplane was operated by the private pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The pilot and the passenger were not injured.
The accident occurred during the initial departure from Daytona Beach Airport in Daytona Beach, Florida.
The pilot stated that he had made prior arrangements with the tower to receive light gun signals for takeoff from an intersection on runway 7L.
With about 3000 feet of runway remaining of the 10,500 foot runway, the pilot accelerated the airplane for takeoff.
The airplane climbed to an altitude of about 100 feet when a loss of engine power occurred.
The airplane descended and collided with the ground about 150 feet from the end of the runway.
A witness stated that the engine appeared to be running very rough as the airplane accelerated towards the end of the runway.
The airplane had been parked on the ramp and not flown for about one year prior to this flight.
During the post-accident examination of the airplane, it was determined that there was about one half tank of automotive gasoline in the fuel tanks.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, the visual examination of the fuel supply revealed that the automotive gasoline appeared to be "stale".
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
