National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RIALTO, CA
Accident Number: LAX00LA181
Date & Time: 05/01/2000, 1645 PDT
Registration: N5395S
Aircraft: Hughes 269C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The helicopter landed hard and rolled over during a practice autorotation.
The CFI was providing dual instruction to his student, a CFI candidate.
The student was handling all of the controls, and he intended to perform a 180-degree full touchdown autorotation.
During the maneuver, the CFI observed that his student had allowed the airspeed to decrease and the main rotor rpm to become low.
The CFI called the low rotor rpm situation to his student's attention.
However, the student did not take decisive corrective action by initiating a power recovery in sufficient time to avoid the resultant low rotor rpm flare and hard touchdown.
No mechanical malfunctions were noted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student's misjudged altitude and failure to maintain rotor rpm while practicing an autorotation, and, the instructor's delayed remedial corrective action and inadequate supervision of the flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
AUTOROTATION - INITIATED - DUAL STUDENT 2.
(C) ALTITUDE - MISJUDGED - DUAL STUDENT 3.
(C) ROTOR RPM - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 4.
(C) REMEDIAL ACTION - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 5.
The helicopter was substantially damaged, and the commercial certificated flight instructor (CFI) and the student sustained minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The instructional flight was performed under 14 CFR Part 91, and it originated from Rialto about 1600.
The CFI indicated to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that he was providing dual instruction to the student, and the student was handling all of the engine and flight controls.
The CFI was providing training to the student who was a CFI candidate.
The accident occurred during a practice, 180-degree full touchdown autorotation, when the helicopter's airspeed decreased and the main rotor rpm became too low.
The CFI indicated that he observed the low rpm indication and called it to the attention of his student, but the student did not take decisive corrective action by promptly initiating a power recovery to avoid the resultant low rotor rpm flare and hard touchdown.
No mechanical malfunctions were noted.
The student reported to the Safety Board investigator that he holds an airline transport pilot certificate with both airplane and rotorcraft ratings.
He also holds a CFI certificate for airplanes.
The purpose of the flight was to receive instruction in furtherance of a rotorcraft instructor's certificate.
The student indicated that he commenced the practice full touchdown autorotation from 2,000 feet mean sea level (about 545 above ground level), and abeam the desired taxiway touchdown point.
He stated that, "As I rolled out on final at 300 feet (agl) I was low."
The student indicated that although he had initiated a power recovery, the helicopter impacted the ground hard.
He also stated that no mechanical malfunctions occurred during the flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 67, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Helicopter Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2050 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: HIO-360-D1A Registered Owner: METRO AIR SERVICES, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
