National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOMER, AK
Accident Number: ANC00LA053
Date & Time: 05/01/2000, 1230 AKD
Registration: N301MH
Aircraft: Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis During an on-demand passenger flight, the airline transport certificated pilot was landing a helicopter at a lake gauging station.
The gauging station was surrounded by snow-covered terrain.
His two passengers were conducting snow pack studies around the lake.
Flat light conditions existed at the lake, and light drizzle was falling.
The pilot was utilizing the gauging station as his landing reference point, but during the landing approach, he flew past the station and had no other visual references.
The skids of the helicopter contacted the snow, and the pilot applied upward collective pitch.
He attempted to stabilize the helicopter in a hover, but began drifting forward and to the left.
The left landing gear skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled onto its left side.
A passenger described the weather conditions at the landing site as the 'inside of a ping pong ball.'
The pilot recommended additional white-out training as a way to prevent the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudging the landing flare in whiteout/flat light conditions.
Factors associated with the accident are the whiteout and flat lighting conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 2.
(C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - OTHER ---------- Occurrence #2: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT Findings 4.
The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The helicopter was operated by Maritime Helicopters Inc., Homer, Alaska.
The airline transport certificated pilot, and the two passengers, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
A VFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Homer Airport, Homer, at 1130.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on May 1, at 1747, the Chief Pilot for the operator reported the helicopter was landing at Bradley Lake, located on the Kenai Peninsula.
The helicopter pilot was landing next to a gauging station that was surrounded by snow-covered terrain.
Flat light conditions existed at the lake, and light drizzle was falling.
The sky conditions were 500 feet overcast, and the visibility was about 1 mile.
The pilot was utilizing the gauging station as his landing reference point, but during the landing approach, he flew past the station and had no other visual references.
The skids of the helicopter contacted the snow, and the pilot applied upward collective pitch.
He attempted to stabilize the helicopter in a hover, but began drifting forward and to the left.
The left landing gear skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled onto its left side.
The Pilot/Operator report (NTSB form 6120.1/2) submitted by the pilot, included a written statement.
In the statement, the pilot said that during the landing approach, he passed the gauging unit that he was using as a reference.
After passing the unit, he focused his attention on the snow in front of the helicopter.
When the helicopter touched down on the snow, the pilot said he thought the helicopter was still one or two feet above the snow surface.
He brought the helicopter to a hover, but the helicopter drifted forward about 30 feet, and about 60 to 75 feet to the left.
The left skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled over.
In the Recommendation Section of the 6120.1/2 form where comments can be added about how the accident could have been prevented, the pilot noted "additional white-out training."
Both passengers in the helicopter reported that during the landing approach, the helicopter developed a high sink rate and touched down hard on the snow, beyond the gauging station.
The terrain presented no visual references, and one passenger described the visual conditions as "the inside of a ping pong ball."
Both passengers said the weather conditions included bright, filtered sunlight through overcast skies, and a light rain.
: 3200 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: 250-C20R Registered Owner: MARITIME HELICOPTERS INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
