Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Reading, PA
Accident Number:
ERA15LA294
Date & Time:
08/01/2015, 1319 EDT 
Registration:
N6566D
Aircraft:
COMMANDER AIRCRAFT CO 114
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the airline transport pilot, about 30 minutes into the personal flight and while the 
airplane was at 3,000 ft mean sea level, the engine "seemed to lose power for a second." About 
1 second later, the engine "shut off completely." The pilot tried to restart the engine by turning 
on the electric fuel boost pump and then moving the fuel selector to each of the positions 
without success. He then moved the fuel selector back to the "both tanks" position and set the 
nose pitch for best glide speed; however, the airplane was unable to glide to the airport, so the 
pilot set it up for an off-field landing. During the forced landing, the airplane encountered 
uneven terrain, and the right wing struck a tree. 
A postaccident engine test run was conducted, and the engine would not start. Subsequent 
examination of the engine revealed that a fuel supply line fitting at the fuel manifold was loose 
and that fuel leaked excessively from the fitting when the electric boost pump was turned on. 
After the fitting was tightened, the engine started without hesitation and ran continuously at 
idle power. Due to three bent propeller blades and vibration, a higher power setting was not 
attempted. A review of the airplane and engine logbooks found no entries indicating that any 
recent maintenance had been conducted on the fuel system.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper installation of the fuel supply line fitting at the fuel manifold, which resulted in 
the line loosening in-flight, fuel leakage, and a subsequent total loss of engine power.
Findings
Aircraft
Engine fuel and control - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Installation - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Environmental issues
Rough terrain - Contributed to outcome
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 5ERA15LA294
Factual Information
On August 1, 2015, about 1319 eastern daylight time, a Commander Aircraft Company 114-B, 
N6566D, was force landed following a reported loss of engine power during cruise flight near 
Reading, Pennsylvania. The airline transport-rated pilot and a private pilot-rated passenger 
were not injured, and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to 
Precision Machine Tool Solutions LLC and was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 
Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Day, visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The local flight originated at Reading 
Regional Airport (RDG), Reading, Pennsylvania about 1250. 
The airline transport-rated pilot, who reported that he was the pilot-in-command, seated in the 
right, cockpit seat, reported the following. About 30 minutes into the flight, at 3,000 feet above 
mean sea level, while returning to RDG, the engine "seemed to lose power for a second." About 
1 second later, the engine "shut off completely." He assumed the controls and immediately 
began to accomplish the engine failure procedures. He turned on the electric boost pump and 
moved the fuel tank selector to all positions; the engine would not restart. He returned the 
selector to the "both tanks" position and set the nose pitch for best glide speed. He called RDG 
approach control and advised them of the situation. Unable to glide to the airport, he set up for 
an off-field landing. During the forced landing, undulating terrain was encountered, and the 
right wing struck a tree. The airplane came to a stop in a vegetable garden and both occupants 
exited the cockpit.
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) responded to the accident site 
and examined the wreckage. The fuselage, empennage, and left wing exhibited structural 
damage from impact forces. The right wing was sheared off at the root. Both wing tanks 
contained fuel, and there was evidence of fuel leakage at the accident site. The wreckage was 
recovered and moved to a recovery facility for further examination. 
On September 16, 2015, the engine was examined by an investigator from the NTSB and an 
inspector from the FAA. The wings had been removed from the airplane for transport to the 
recovery facility. The remaining fuselage was secured to a flatbed trailer for an engine test-run. 
Fuel was supplied via a 5-gallon container to the right wing side of the fuel selector. During the 
first attempt, the engine did not start. Subsequent examination of the engine revealed a loose 
fitting that connected the fuel supply line to the fuel manifold, with fuel leaking from the fitting 
when the auxiliary fuel pump was activated. The fitting was tightened and the engine then 
started on the first attempt without hesitation and ran continuously at idle power. Due to three 
bent propeller blades and vibration, a higher power setting was not attempted. 
 A review of the maintenance records for the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of 
recent maintenance on the fuel system. The most recent inspection was an annual inspection, 
completed on January 1, 2015. During that inspection, a pressure test of the fuel system was 
recorded. At the time of the accident, the engine had accrued 56 hours of operating time since 
the annual inspection of January 1.
Page 3 of 5ERA15LA294
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
56, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/13/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
327 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial; Private
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/12/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2014
Flight Time:
3700 hours (Total, all aircraft), 546 hours (Total, this make and model), 2680 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 191 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 80 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA15LA294
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
COMMANDER AIRCRAFT CO
Registration:
N6566D
Model/Series:
114 B
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
14671
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/01/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
56 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1091 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-T4B5
Registered Owner:
PRECISION MACHINE TOOL 
SOLUTIONS LLC
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RDG, 343 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1354 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
130째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
260째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.84 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
30째C / 12째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Reading, PA (RDG)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Reading, PA (RDG)
Type of Clearance:
Traffic Advisory
Departure Time:
1250 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Reading Regional Airport (RDG)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
343 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 5 of 5ERA15LA294
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.425833, -76.039167 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Ralph E Hicks
Adopted Date:
03/14/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Savickas; FAA/FSDO; Allentown, PA
Publish Date:
03/14/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91698
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
