Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
WINTERSET, IA
Accident Number:
CHI98LA077
Date & Time:
01/02/1998, 1500 CST 
Registration:
N8350Z
Aircraft:
Piper PA-34-220T
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot said that during a straight-in approach to the airport, he kept the airspeed at 110 
knots, because the ride was very rough.  The airplane's airspeed crossing the runway threshold 
was 100 knots.  The airplane touched down about 1,000 feet down the runway.  The pilot said 
that when he applied brake pressure, he noticed that he had no pressure on the left brake 
pedal.  The pilot said that he pumped the pedal three times, and then reapplied the brakes.  
The airplane was now three quarters of the way down the runway.  Just before reaching the 
displaced threshold, the pilot said that the airplane swerved to the right.  The pilot swerved the 
airplane to the left in hopes of turning onto the grass.  The airplane slid sideways in the grass 
crashing into a fence and coming to rest in a ditch.  Examination of the runway revealed tire 
marks beginning a third of the way down from the approach end, and running evenly down the 
runway until departing the prepared surface.  Tire impressions in the grass continued from the 
end of the runway, veering left, and ending at the spot where the airplane came to rest.  
Examination of the wreckage revealed no anomalies. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot misjudging his airspeed on final approach, resulting in a long touchdown and  
insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway available. 
Page 2 of 6CHI98LA077
Findings
Occurrence #1: OVERRUN
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) DISTANCE/SPEED - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. OBJECT - FENCE
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
Page 3 of 6CHI98LA077
Factual Information
 On January 2, 1998, at 1500 central standard time (cst), a Piper PA-34-220T, N8350Z, 
operated by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when on landing roll, the 
airplane departed the end of the runway, rolled through a ditch and impacted into a fence.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was 
being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.  No flight plan was on file.  There were no injuries 
reported by the pilot or the two passengers on board.  The cross- country flight originated at 
Harrison, Arkansas, at 1330 cst, and was en route to Winterset, Iowa.
In his written statement, the pilot said that he established the airplane on a 6 and 1/2 mile 
straight-in approach to the airport. He said that the ride was very rough and that he kept the 
airspeed at 110 knots.  Crossing the approach end of the runway, the pilot said that his airspeed 
was 100 knots.  The pilot said that he "used up about 1,000 feet to negotiate the landing." As 
the pilot began to apply brake pressure, he noticed that he had no pressure on the left brake 
pedal.  The pilot said that he pumped the pedal three times, and then reapplied the brakes.  By 
this time, the airplane was three quarters of the way down the runway.  Just before reaching 
the displaced threshold, the pilot said that the airplane swerved to the right.  The pilot said that 
he swerved the airplane to the left in hopes of turning onto the grass.  The airplane began to 
slide sideways in the grass crashing into a fence and coming to rest in a ditch.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who examined the wreckage at the scene, 
found the airplane resting upright in a field approximately 75 feet off the departure end of 
runway 32 at Winterset-Madison County Airport, Iowa.  Tire marks were observed beginning 
approximately a third of the way down from the approach end of the runway, and ran evenly 
down the runway centerline until departing the prepared surface.  Tire impressions in the grass 
began at the end of the runway and veered to the left, ending at the spot where the airplane 
came to rest.  The outboard four feet of the airplane's right wing, including the right aileron 
and outboard edge of the right flap, were bent upward almost 90 degrees.  The right main 
landing gear was bent aft and broken.  The right propeller showed torsional bending and 
chordwise scratches.  The right stabilator and elevator were bent upward.  Flight control 
continuity was confirmed.  No anomalies were found in the brakes, brake lines, master 
cylinders or brake pedals.  No fluid leaks were found in the system.  Examination of the 
engines, engine controls, and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
Page 4 of 6CHI98LA077
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/06/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2908 hours (Total, all aircraft), 407 hours (Total, this make and model), 2871 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 59 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N8350Z
Model/Series:
PA-34-220T PA-34-220T
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
34-8133034
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/11/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4570 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
69 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4156 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360-KB1
Registered Owner:
ROTOR AIR, INC.
Rated Power:
220 hp
Operator:
BENNY MAGNESS
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI98LA077
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DSM, 957 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
21 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1454 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
45°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
9 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
21 knots / 28 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
HARRISON, AR (HRO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (3Y3)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1330 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
WINTERSET-MADISON COUNTY (3Y3)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1110 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3000 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DAVID      C BOWLING
Adopted Date:
05/04/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
LARRY   YOUNG; DES MOINES, IA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI98LA077
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
