National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Iliamna, AK
Accident Number: ANC06LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/2005, 1930 AKD
Registration: N9950X
Aircraft: Cessna 185
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airline transport pilot was conducting a 14 CFR Part 91 personal cross-country flight, when the engine lost power about 20 miles from the final destination.
The pilot said the symptoms were similar to fuel starvation, but according to his calculations he should have had 30 minutes of fuel remaining.
He wrote, "although I felt I properly drained the tanks prior to takeoff, it seems there was still water trapped in the tanks."
After recovery the airplane's engine was prepared with a new propeller and clean fuel at an aircraft maintenance facility.
The engine was started, and run through a variety of power settings, without any evidence of mechanical malfunction.
The pilot reported that during the forced landing, the landing gear was torn off, structurally damaging the fuselage.
He also stated that prior to the accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection, which failed to detect water-contaminated fuel, resulting in a loss of engine power during cruise flight, and subsequent in-flight collision with terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On October 2, 2005, about 1930 Alaska daylight time, a Cessna 185 airplane, N9950X, collided with terrain during an emergency landing following a loss of engine power during normal cruise, about 20 miles west of Iliamna, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated by the pilot as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airline transport pilot and sole passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight departed from a dirt airstrip 20 miles north of Aleknagik, Alaska, about 1830.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on October 4, the pilot said about 20 miles west of Iliamna the engine lost power.
He said the symptoms were similar to fuel starvation, but according to his calculations he should have had 30 minutes of fuel remaining.
He said during the forced landing the landing gear was torn off, structurally damaging the fuselage.
He said prior to the accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
He wrote, "although I felt I properly drained the tanks prior to takeoff, it seems there was still water trapped in the tanks."
On October 12, after recovery, the airplane's engine was prepared with a new propeller and clean fuel.
The engine was started, and run through a variety of power settings, without any evidence of mechanical malfunction.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
