Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Miami, FL
Accident Number:
ERA13FA186
Date & Time:
04/03/2013, 1600 EDT 
Registration:
N3101H
Aircraft:
ROBINSON R44
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
The pilot, who also owned the helicopter company, hired a mechanic to change the main rotor 
blades on the helicopter. The main rotor blade change also required several adjustments to the 
pitch change rods on the rotor system followed by test flights. The accident flight was the 
second maintenance flight of the day and occurred about 1 hour of operation after the main 
rotor blade replacement.
Witnesses observed the helicopter flying and heard a loud ﬁpopﬂ sound followed by 
components separating from the helicopter. They then observed the tail section separate from 
the helicopter and the helicopter crash to the ground. Witness statements and wreckage 
documentation were consistent with a main rotor blade rotating upward during the accident 
flight, which was followed by a tail strike and the helicopter rolling inverted. Subsequently, the 
mast bumped and the helicopter descended uncontrolled to the ground.
A witness, who had flown the helicopter numerous times, stated that he observed the mechanic 
make adjustments to the pitch change rods on the rotor system during the maintenance 
procedure. He also stated that the mechanic told him that the owner of the helicopter was 
upset and that the helicopter manufacturer installed refurbished spindles onto the new blades. 
The owner™s frustration likely distracted the mechanic and/or applied pressure for the 
mechanic to return the helicopter to service and revenue operations as soon as possible. 
On-scene examination of the wreckage revealed that the pitch-link-to-swash-plate connection 
for one of the main rotor blades was missing. The pitch link and horn were found about 90 feet 
away. Metallurgical examination of the main rotor system revealed that the attaching hardware 
for the pitch-link-to-swash-plate connection was most likely not secured properly and 
separated after about 1 hour of flight following the maintenance. All other failures were 
consistent with overstress and no preexisting cracking was noted. No other anomalies with the 
helicopter structure, systems, or engine were found.
Page 2 of 9ERA13FA186
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The mechanic's failure to properly secure the pitch link hardware of one main rotor blade to 
the rotating swash plate, which resulted in the pitch link separating in flight and the pilot's 
subsequent loss of control. Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s/owner's pressure on the 
mechanic to return the helicopter to revenue service.
Findings
Aircraft
Main rotor mast/swashplate - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Replacement - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Motivation/respond to pressure - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 9ERA13FA186
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 3, 2013 about 1600 eastern daylight time, Robinson R44, N3101H, had components 
separate in flight and the helicopter impacted the ground shortly after takeoff from Kendall 
Tamiami Executive airport (TMB), Miami, Florida. The helicopter was registered to and 
operated by Bravo Helicopters, LLC, of Miami, Florida. The commercial pilot and pilot-rated 
mechanic incurred fatal injuries. The maintenance test flight was conducted under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight that departed a few minutes before the 
accident.
Multiple witnesses in the vicinity of the crash site reported hearing a loud "pop" noise and 
seeing parts separate from the helicopter as the helicopter flew overhead. Witnesses were also 
consistent in reporting that the empennage section of the helicopter then departed the aircraft 
before impact with the ground. One witness, standing about 20 feet from the impact, stated 
that the helicopter was inverted over the industrial buildings before it impacted two palm trees 
about 25 feet above ground level, a pickup truck, and then the ground. Another witness stated 
that the postcrash fire started after the pilot and passenger were extracted from the helicopter 
or about 5 minutes after the initial impact. He also stated that the helicopter was inverted over 
the industrial buildings.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot held a commercial pilot 
certificate with ratings for helicopter and airplane single-engine land, issued on October 23, 
2003. The pilot was issued a mechanic certificate on October 23, 2003, with ratings for 
airframe and power plant. The pilot was issued a first-class medical certificate on February 25, 
2013, with the medical restriction "must wear corrective lenses for distant and possess glasses 
for near vision." FAA records also indicated that in February of 2013, the pilot reported 6,840 
total flight hours and 76 flight hours in the previous 6 months. The pilot's logbooks were not 
retrieved.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The four-seat, skid-type landing gear helicopter, serial number 1610, was manufactured in 
2006. The helicopter was powered by a Lycoming O-540-F1B5, 225 horsepower engine, serial 
number L-26556-40A. Review of the aircraft and engine logbooks revealed the last annual 
inspection was conducted on December 04, 2012 at an hour meter time of 749.4 total hours of 
operation. The hour meter was located at the crash site and read 760.2 hours. According to 
FAA records, the helicopter was issued a standard airworthiness certificate on October 21, 
2011. 
According to the helicopter logbook, the manufacturer's order form indicated that both spindle 
bearings were replaced, refurbished, and installed on the new rotor blades. When this was 
completed, the new rotor blades automatically incurred a reduced service life when installing 
used spindles. The remaining time on the new rotor blades was reduced from 2,200 hours or 
12 years, whichever comes first, to match the used spindles which had about 1,439 hours or 5 
years remaining, whichever came first. The rotor blades and spindles expire as a pair.
Page 4 of 9ERA13FA186
The mechanic was hired to conduct the re-installation of the main rotor blades on the 
helicopter on April 3, 2013. The course of the day was spent installing the blades, making 
adjustments to the pitch change links, and performing a track and balance procedure that 
adjusts the rotor blades for the smoothest operation on the rotor system. An approximate, 
uneventful 1 hour test flight was conducted prior to the accident flight.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The TMB 1553 weather observation, located 1.5 miles west of the accident site, reported wind 
from 120 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 18 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, scattered clouds at 
3,000 feet above ground level, temperature 29 degrees Celsius, dew point 20 degrees Celsius, 
and an altimeter setting of 30.00 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter was located upright in a parking lot on the corner of southwest 128th street and 
southwest 122nd avenue in Miami, Florida, and came to rest on a heading of 105 degrees 
magnetic (M). The debris field was 110 degrees at a distance of about 500 feet. A postcrash fire 
had consumed a majority of the wreckage. Several helicopter components were located on the 
roofs of several industrial buildings. 
The red main rotor blade exhibited thermal damage about 7 feet from the hub outward towards 
the rotor tip, and the entire blade was upside down. The red main rotor blade data plate was 
missing and the alternate number was found on the inside of the tip cap as blade 3043. There 
was a paint scuff on the top surface of the spindle adjacent to the hub. There were impact 
marks on the hub from the pitch horn boot and impact marks from the pitch horn to the hub 
leading edge face with the leading edge, 60 degrees upward from normal orientation. The 
spindle was torn and there was deformation of the leading edge of the spindle bolt hole. There 
was a fracture from the leading edge aft, to 2.7 inches with the aft face having a journal 
impression. The pitch horn was fractured and deformed with impact marks immediately 
adjacent to the fracture surface. The pitch change link assembly remained attached to the pitch 
horn by the appropriate hardware. There was a torque stripe on one side of the pal nut. The rod 
end at the opposite end of the link assembly was unremarkable. The blade was cut 13 feet 7 
inches inboard of the rotor tip for recovery. The spindle was connected and rotated roughly.
The blue main rotor blade exhibited thermal damage from the hub outward about 8 feet 
towards the rotor tip and the entire blade was bowed down. The data plate was found installed 
on the blade as number 3034. Blade delamination was consistent with thermal damage. There 
was impact damage 4 feet 6 inches, 6 feet 6 inches, and 10 feet 10 inches from the blade tip. 
The blade was cut 13 feet inboard of the rotor tip for recovery. The blade tip cover and weight 
was in place with no chord wise scoring noted from the tip inboard on the lower surface. There 
was compression wrinkles on the lower surface 1 foot 7 inches inboard from the rotor tip. The 
blade was displaced aft about the mid span and was bowed up 3 feet inboard from the tip. 
There was a compression wrinkle on the upper surface 6 feet 8 inches inboard from the rotor 
tip. The leading edge of the upper surface exhibited chord wise scratches from the tip inboard 
to 7 feet that corresponded to a ground scar in the asphalt at the crash site. The upper skin was 
delaminated from the root of the rotor to 9 feet outboard. Upward bending started 14 feet 
inboard of the blade tip. The spindle was connected and rotated roughly.
The upper swash plate fork remained connected to the swash plate. The yolk remained 
connected to the fork by the dog bone. The yolk was connected to the dog bone on both sides. 
Page 5 of 9ERA13FA186
The yolk was fractured on the weighted sides and was recovered from the roof top of a building. 
The weights were in place but damaged due to impact with the gravel roof of the industrial 
park building.
The tail boom exhibited a vertical scuff with white paint transfer 25.25 inches forward of the aft 
bulkhead, adjacent to the tail rotor blade tip arch. The intermediate flex coupling was 
deformed slightly, but still connected. There was rotational contact by the flex coupling with 
the upper frame. The tail cone was severed by the main rotor system between bays five and six 
during flight and came to rest 275 M about 300 feet from the initial impact point. The 
empennage remained attached to a 32-inch section of the tail boom, and exhibited damage to 
the trailing edge of the horizontal stabilizer. The tail rotor blades remained attached to the tail 
rotor gear box with one blade partially severed 9 inches outboard from the attachment point. 
The tail rotor rotated freely. There was fragmentation of bays five, six, and seven, at the left 
side where the danger sticker was adhered. This was consistent with a leading edge strike from 
a main rotor blade.
The tail rotor driveshaft was cut 8 inches aft of the flex coupling. The tail rotor gearbox rotated 
freely with no abnormal noise. Tail rotor flight control continuity was examined from the 
pedals to the tail rotor. Several separations were noted due to overload and fire damage with no 
connections compromised. Main rotor flight control continuity was examined from the cyclic 
and collective to the main rotor blades. Several separations were noted due to overload and fire 
damage with no connections compromised, with the exception of the pitch link to swash plate 
connection for blade number 3043. The pitch link/horn departed the helicopter and was found 
260 degrees M and 90 feet from the initial impact point. 
The instrument panel showed crushing damage and was ripped out of the helicopter during 
rescue operations. All canopy screens were destroyed and fragments were found at the 
beginning of the debris path, on the roof of four buildings, and at the initial impact point. 
The carburetor mixture knob was full rich and the carburetor heat was unlocked and on. All 
crew and passenger seats were destroyed by postcrash fire. The pilot and passenger restraints 
were cut to recover the victims and were intact before the postcrash fire ensued. All restraint 
system harnesses were destroyed due to postcrash fire with the buckles fire damaged 
The alternator was attached to the engine and fire damaged. The alternator belt was consumed 
by fire. The starter was fire and impact damaged and remained attached to the engine. No 
vacuum pump was installed on the engine. The magnetos and ignition harness were fire 
damaged. The top and bottom spark plugs were removed and exhibited light gray combustion 
deposits and a normal wear condition with one covered in oil. The engine was rotated by hand 
and compression and suction was noted on all cylinders. Crankshaft and valve train continuity 
were confirmed to the rear gears. All cylinders were examined using a lighted bore scope and 
no anomalies were noted.
The carburetor was destroyed by impact and fire. The carburetor fuel inlet screen was 
removed, fire damaged, and absent of debris. All fuel lines were fire damaged. The fuel line 
between the fuel valve and gascolator was compromised due to impact as was the fuel inlet 
fitting to the carburetor. The gascolator bowl and screen were clear of debris. No fuel was 
observed. 
The lower swash plate interrupter was attached to the swash plate. The slider tube was sheared 
Page 6 of 9ERA13FA186
from the mount and was ripped around to the top. The swash plate rotated roughly by hand.
The swash plate assembly for the blue blade exhibited a pitch link that was bent in the center 
section and at the lower rod end. The upper rod end fractured in a bending overload at the 
threaded area and remained safety wired. 
The swash plate assembly for the red blade exhibited a disconnected lower rod end from the 
swash plate and the upper rod end remained attached to the pitch horn, which was fractured 
and the attached bolt was bent. The attaching hardware for the lower rod end was not 
recovered. There was no visible deformation damage to the pitch link mounting hole.
A detailed report of the airframe, systems, and power plant examination is contained in the 
NTSB public docket.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examinations were performed on the pilot and pilot-rated mechanic by the 
Miami-Dade Medical Examiner's office. The cause of death for each was reported as blunt force 
injuries.
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed forensic toxicology on specimens from 
the pilot and pilot-rated mechanic. The tests were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, 
drugs, and ethanol.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Several components from the rotor head system were harvested from the wreckage and sent to 
the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, D. C. for further examination. The examination 
revealed that all fractures were consisted with overstress and no preexisting cracking was 
noted. The examination also revealed that the pitch change link attachment hole for the red 
blade appeared intact, free of damage, and was covered with black sooty deposits. The pitch 
link attachment hardware was missing from the attachment to the red blade side of the swash 
plate. A detailed report of the examination is contained in the NTSB public docket.
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to a pilot-rated witness, who was at the hangar during the maintenance procedure, 
the pilot was upset during the course of the day. The pilot had conducted conversations with 
the helicopter manufacturer over the installation of the refurbished spindles that were installed 
on the new blades and that it was costing him $10,000 a month in lost revenues due to the 
helicopter not being in service. The pilot witness, who had flown the helicopter numerous 
times, stated that he observed the mechanic make adjustments to the pitch change rods on the 
rotor system during the maintenance procedure. He also stated that the mechanic told him that 
the owner of the helicopter was upset that the helicopter manufacturer installed refurbished 
spindles onto the new blades.
Page 7 of 9ERA13FA186
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Initial climb
Part(s) separation from AC (Defining event)
Flight control sys malf/fail
Mast bumping
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
53
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/23/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/25/2013
Flight Time:
6840 hours (Total, all aircraft), 999999 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON
Registration:
N3101H
Model/Series:
R44 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1610
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/04/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
11 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
760 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-540-F1B5
Registered Owner:
Bravo Helicopters LLC
Rated Power:
225 hp
Operator:
Bravo Helicopters LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 8 of 9ERA13FA186
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTMB, 10 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 6 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Miami, FL (TMB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Miami, FL (TMB)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1555 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
Kendall Tamiami Executive Airp 
(TMB)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
10 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
25.642222, -80.388056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Patrick M Murray
Adopted Date:
06/02/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Emil Ceril; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopters; Torrence, CA
Mike Childers; Lycoming Engines; WilliamsPort, PA
Publish Date:
06/02/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86581
Page 9 of 9ERA13FA186
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
