National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BLOUNTVILLE, TN
Accident Number: ATL96LA044
Date & Time: 02/02/1996, 1830 EST
Registration: N204AA
Aircraft: Beech C-45G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The pilot reported that as he overflew the Tri-City airport, Tennessee at 9,000 feet, the right engine power slowly decreased.
The airplane was in the clouds with an outside air temperature of about zero degrees Celsius.
Right engine manifold heat was applied for a few seconds, with no noticeable difference in engine performance.
The right magnetos were also checked with no obvious malfunctions noted.
A descent for landing was initiated to the Tri-City airport and manifold heat was applied and removed several times, with no appreciable effect.
On short final approach, when the landing gear was extended, the right main gear did not indicate down.
There was insufficient time to perform the emergency gear extension procedure.
A go-around was initiated, during which the pilot discovered that the left manifold heat control was now stuck in the 'ON' position.
The pilot stated that with less than full power available on the left engine, and the right propeller unfeathered, the airplane could be climbed to about 200 feet.
He flew the airplane until terrain clearance was no longer possible, then landed in a field, gear up.
The airplane slid into trees and was substantially damaged.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper use of carburetor heat which resulted in a continuing loss of engine power, and the right landing gear's failure to extend during a single engine approach.
A factor was the insufficient time available to extend the landing gear via the emergency extension procedure.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) ---------- Occurrence #3: WHEELS UP LANDING Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 3.
(C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - INOPERATIVE 4.
GEAR EXTENSION - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(F) EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 6.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On February 2, 1996, about 1830 eastern standard time, a Beech C-45G, N204AA, collided with trees during a forced landing near Blountville, Tennessee.
The airplane was operated by Saber Aviation, Inc. under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and instrument flight rules (IFR).
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed.
An IFR flight plan was filed for the positioning flight.
There were minor injuries to the airline transport pilot, and the airplane was substantially damaged.
Origination of the flight was Madison, Indiana, about 1700 on the same day.
The pilot reported that as he overflew the Tri-Cities, Tennessee airport, at 9,000 feet, the right engine power slowly decreased, with the manifold pressure dropping from 28 inches to 25 inches.
The airplane was in the clouds with an outside air temperature of about zero degrees Celsius.
Right engine manifold heat was applied for a few seconds, with no noticeable difference in engine performance.
The right magnetos were also checked with no obvious malfunctions noted.
The left engine began to run roughly, manifold heat was applied to the left induction system and the roughness of the engine was eliminated.
A descent for landing was initiated to the Tri-Cities airport.
During the descent manifold heat was applied and removed several times, with no appreciable effect on the right engine.
On short final approach, when the landing gear was extended, the right main gear did not indicate down.
A go-around was initiated, during which the pilot discovered that the left manifold heat control was now stuck in the "ON" position.
The pilot stated that with less than full power available on the left engine, and the right propeller unfeathered, the airplane could be climbed to about 200 feet.
He flew the airplane until terrain clearance was no longer possible, then landed in a field, gear up.
The airplane slid into trees and was substantially damaged.
: 10100 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 20 Hours Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 16972 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Installed, activated, aided in locating accident Engine Model/Series: R-985 Registered Owner: SABER  AVIATION, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
