National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LAKEVIEW, OR
Accident Number: SEA96TA046
Date & Time: 02/01/1996, 1615 PST
Registration: N2866B
Aircraft: Christen Industries A-1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Public Aircraft
 Analysis The aircraft was being used on an animal control flight, and the pilot was executing a low pass over a frozen, flat, snow covered lake surface, in pursuit of a coyote.
During this maneuver, the gunner's weapon jammed, and the pilot diverted his attention to the direction of the weapon's muzzle, which was pointed toward a fuel tank.
Immediately thereafter, the aircraft's wheels drug in the snow covered surface, and the aircraft nosed over.
An overcast existed at the time, and there was a lack of references available on the smooth, even surface of the lake to enhance the pilot's depth perception.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain altitude/clearance from the terrain (snow covered, frozen lake).
Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's attention being diverted to a perceived safety hazard, and lack of visual cues for pilot perception of clearance from the lake surface.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) VISUAL/AURAL PERCEPTION - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On February 1, 1996, approximately 1615 Pacific standard time, a Christen Industries, Inc., A- 1, N2866B, operated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture on an exclusive use lease, was substantially damaged during a collision with terrain while maneuvering.
The certificated commercial pilot sustained minor injuries and the passenger was uninjured.
The accident occurred on the frozen, snow covered surface of Goose Lake, approximately five miles southeast of the Lakeview Airport, Lakeview, Oregon.
The flight, which was to be operated for the purposes of animal control, was public in nature.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
The aircraft had originated from Lakeview approximately 1400 hours and was on a local flight.
In an interview, the pilot reported that while executing a low pass in the vicinity of a coyote the gunner's weapon jammed.
The pilot, concerned as to the direction in which the weapon was aimed (towards a fuel tank), shifted his attention to the gun barrel to move it away from critical aircraft areas.
During this event the aircraft's main gear touched down on the snow covered lake surface.
Tracks from the wheels indicated a ground roll of approximately 30 feet before the aircraft nosed over.
There were no references on the surface of the lake, e.g., fence posts, trees, brush, rocks to provide the pilot with depth perception cues.
An overcast existed which filtered the late afternoon sunlight reducing surface shadow effects, and the sun angle was low at the time of the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 38, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
