National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ISLESBORO, ME
Accident Number: NYC96LA059
Date & Time: 02/05/1996, 1415 EST
Registration: N6423X
Aircraft: Cessna 180D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot/owner stated that the preflight and engine run-up were normal, and he departed from runway 19 which is 2400 feet long.
At approximately 500 feet above the ground, the airplane's engine began to run rough.
The pilot reversed course to make a forced landing on runway 1 with a 10 knot tailwind.
The engine subsequently lost complete power; however, a burst of power occurred afterwards.
According to the pilot, the airplane overshot the runway.
He avoided power lines, and then the aircraft 'mushed' into trees about 1/4 mile north of the runway.
A witnesses observed black smoke coming from the engine during the airplane's return to the airport.
Examination of the engine and the fuel system revealed no evidence of malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: a loss of engine power for an undetermined reason.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On February 5, 1996, at 1415 eastern standard time, a Cessna 180D, N6423X, was substantially damaged during a forced landing after takeoff from the Islesboro Airport, Islesboro, Maine.
The private pilot and passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personnel flight that originated at Islesboro, at 1410.
No flight plan had been filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated that the pre-flight and engine run-up were normal.
He departed from runway 19 at the Islesboro Airport (57B), and at approximately 500 feet above the ground, the airplane's engine began to run rough.
The pilot initiated a right turn back to the airport, and the engine continued to run rough while the airplane climbed to 800 feet.
This was followed by a complete loss of engine power as the airplane was approaching runway 01.
The pilot further stated: "...Intersected runway at 45 degree, descending, no power, with tailwind of 10 knots.
Very difficult...to make left turn northbound to rwy 1.
Nearly hit tree tops on east side of runway, was just regaining control...when engine gave an unexpected burst of power.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector's report, a witnesses observed black smoke coming from the engine during the airplane's return to the airport.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
