National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOLY CROSS, AK
Accident Number: ANC00LA033
Date & Time: 03/04/2000, 1230 AST
Registration: N407GV
Aircraft: Cessna 208B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
 Analysis The commercial certificated pilot departed on a scheduled flight.
During cruise, about fifteen minutes after takeoff, he heard a bang.
After landing at the destination airport, damage was discovered to the horizontal stabilizer.
The left mud flap, normally positioned at the aft side of the main landing gear tire, was missing.
The horizontal stabilizer was dented, and had damage to the auxiliary spar.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An in-flight separation of a main landing gear tire mud flap, and subsequent impact with the horizontal stabilizer.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) MISC EQPT/FURNISHINGS - SEPARATION 2.
(C) HORIZONTAL STABILIZER - FOREIGN OBJECT DAMAGE Factual Information On March 4, 2000, about 1230 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Cessna 208B airplane, N407GV, sustained substantial damage during cruise flight between Holy Cross, Alaska, and Aniak, Alaska.
The location of the occurrence was about 18 miles south of Holy Cross, about latitude 61 degrees, 54 minutes north, and longitude 159 degrees, 40 minutes west.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) scheduled flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated as Flight 2602 by Hageland Aviation Services Inc., Anchorage, Alaska.
The commercial certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Holy Cross airport, about 1215.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on March 6, 2000, the director of operations for the company reported the flight was carrying U.S. mail.
The pilot was in cruise flight when he heard a bang.
After landing at Aniak, damage was discovered to the horizontal stabilizer.
The left mud flap, normally positioned at the aft side of the main landing gear tire, was missing.
The horizontal stabilizer was dented, and had damage to the auxiliary spar.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 44, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
