National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HAZELTON, PA
Accident Number: NYC00LA101
Date & Time: 03/01/2000, 0930 EST
Registration: N67639
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While landing on runway 10, the airplane initially touched down on the right main landing gear first and the nose shifted unexpectedly to the left.
The pilot centered the rudder and inputted left aileron in an attempt to get the left main landing gear on the ground; however, the airplane continued to drift to the left.
The airplane departed the left side of the runway, and came to rest in a ditch.
Winds reported at a nearby airport were from 340 degrees at 4 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control while landing with a crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On March 1, 2000, about 0930 Eastern Standard Time, a Cessna 152, N67639, was substantially damaged while landing at the Hazelton Municipal Airport (HZL), Hazleton, Pennsylvania.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight that originated at the Eastern West Virginia Regional/Shepherd Field, Martinsburg, West Virginia.
The flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, while landing on Runway 10, a 4,898-foot long, 100-foot wide, asphalt runway, the airplane initially touched down on the right main landing gear first and the nose shifted unexpectedly to the left.
The pilot centered the rudder and inputted left aileron in an attempt to get the left main landing gear on the ground; however, the airplane continued to drift to the left.
The airplane departed the left side of the runway, and came to rest in a ditch.
The winds reported at an airport 24 miles to the northeast of HZL, at 0954, were from 340 degrees at 4 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 31, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
