Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Cullman, AL
Accident Number:
ATL06LA059
Date & Time:
04/01/2006, 1802 CST 
Registration:
N2183U
Aircraft:
Brantly Helicopter B2B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The helicopter was observed by witnesses descending and flying east bound over County Road 
222 in the vicinity of Whitlock™s General Store between 30 to 200 feet above the ground. One 
witness thought the pilot was following a creek in preparation for landing at a private helipad 
where a mechanic is known to perform maintenance on helicopters. A change in engine noise 
was heard as the helicopter collided with telephone lines, the nose pitched down, the helicopter 
collided with the ground near a highway guardrail, rolled over on its right side, and a post 
crash fire ensued. Examination of the airframe, flight controls, main rotor system, tail rotor 
system, and engine assembly and accessories revealed no anomalies. The pilot stated to his 
brother he has no recollection of the events concerning the flight. Review of records revealed 
the pilot had flown the helicopter 4.1 hours in the last year.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain a visual look out while maneuvering resulting in an in-flight 
collision with wires and the ground. A factor in the accident was the pilot's lack of recent 
experience in rotorcraft operations.
Page 2 of 9ATL06LA059
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. OBJECT - WIRE,STATIC(MARKED)
2. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 9ATL06LA059
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2006, at 1802 central standard time, a Brantly B2B, N2183U, registered to a private 
owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, collided with telephone and guy wires 
while maneuvering in the vicinity of Cullman, Alabama. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The helicopter sustained substantial damage, and a post 
crash fire ensued. The private pilot received serious injuries and stated to his brother that he 
has no recollection of the events concerning the flight. The flight originated from a private 
heliport in Madison, Alabama, on April 1, 2006, at an undetermined time. The helicopter was 
enroute to a private heliport in Cullman, Alabama.
A witness who was driving his truck west bound in the vicinity of Cullman, Alabama stated he 
observed a helicopter flying east bound over County Road 222 between 100 to 200 feet above 
the ground. The helicopter flew over his truck and started a descent as if it was going to land. 
The driver pulled over and turned his vehicle around to watch the helicopter. The helicopter 
leveled off between 30 to 40 feet above the ground and collided with some telephone wires. 
Right before the collision, the witness stated he felt the pilot lost control of the helicopter. The 
nose of the helicopter pitched down and the helicopter collided with the ground near a highway 
guardrail and rolled over on its right side. 
Another witness who was in his back yard with his son heard the helicopter approaching their 
location. The helicopter was flying eastbound across County Road 222 near a creek in the 
vicinity of Whitlock's General Store. The witness thought the pilot was following a creek in 
preparation for landing at a private helipad where a mechanic is known to perform 
maintenance on helicopters. The helicopter was observed to start a descent. The helicopter was 
at about 30 feet above the ground when the witness heard a change in engine noise. The 
witness stated the helicopter collided with telephone lines, the nose pitched down, and the 
helicopter disappeared from view. He immediately informed his wife to call the 911 emergency 
operators. He and his son departed on a four-wheeler and went to the crash site. The helicopter 
was on fire, and he heard someone ask for a knife. He went over to the helicopter and cut the 
pilot's seat belt and the pilot was removed from the burning wreckage. The girlfriend of the 
injured pilot arrived at the accident site shortly after the accident. She stated the pilot was 
taking the helicopter to a private heliport in the immediate area so an annual inspection could 
be performed on the helicopter.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Review of records on file with the FAA Airman Certification Branch, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was issued a private pilot certificate on April 30,1988, with 
ratings for rotorcraft helicopter. The pilot held a third class medical certificate issued on June 
8, 2004, with the restriction, " Holder shall wear corrective lenses." The pilot indicated on his 
application for the third class medical certificate that he had accumulated 152 total flight 
hours. The pilot's last flight review was conducted on March 26, 2006. The pilot's logbook 
revealed he has a total of 160.1 hours of which 83.61 hours are in the B2B. The pilot has 80.6 
hours as pilot-in-command in all helicopters and 79.4 hours in the B2B. The pilot's last 
recorded flight before the accident was during his flight review. The pilot's last flight before the 
flight review was on September 8, 2005.
Page 4 of 9ATL06LA059
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter was a Brantly model B2B, serial No. 345, manufactured in 1965. The helicopter 
is equipped with a Lycoming IVO-360-A1A, 180 horsepower engine. The last recorded annual 
inspection was conducted on March 18, 2005. The Hobbs meter indicated 537.2 hours. The 
total time since major overhaul was 790.2 hours. The airframe total time was 1,405.0 hours. 
The helicopter has flown 4.1 hours since the annual inspection not including the accident flight. 
The Hobbs meter was destroyed by post crash fire. No Airworthiness Directive compliance list 
was located with the logbooks.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest weather reporting facility at the time of the accident was Folsum Field, Cullman, 
Alabama, located 11.2 south southwest of the accident site. The 1800 surface weather 
observation was: clear, visibility 10 miles, temperature 70 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 
temperature 55 degrees Fahrenheit, winds calm, and altimeter 30.09. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was located on County Road 222, adjacent to Whitlock's General Store, and 11.2 
miles south southwest of Folsom Field, Cullman, Alabama. Examination of the wreckage 
revealed the helicopter collided with telephone wires and guy wires before colliding with 
County Road 222, and came to rest on its right side on a heading of 170-degrees magnetic next 
to a guardrail opposing opposite traffic. 
The cabin assembly, upper and lower canopy, left and right cabin seats, seatbelts and shoulder 
harness were consumed by fire. The left doorframe separated from the airframe and the door 
glass was consumed by fire. The right cabin door separated from the airframe and received fire 
damage. The door glass was consumed by fire. The lower console instrument panel was 
consumed by fire except for the circuit breaker panel. The upper console separated from the 
lower console and was fire damaged. The pilot seat frame was present and fire damaged. 
All struts were connected to the left skid and were fire damaged. Recovery personnel cut the 
two rear struts. The forward lateral and oleo strut separated from the airframe. The drag strut 
separated from the airframe. All struts were connected to the right skid and were fire damaged.  
Recovery personnel cut the forward oleo strut. The forward lateral strut separated from the 
fuselage. Recovery personnel cut the rear lateral and rear oleo struts. The drag strut separated 
from the airframe.
The right rudder bell crank was attached to the seat frame. The left seat frame was not located. 
The left seat rudder bell crank separated from the seat and was fire damaged. Both control rods 
that connect the left seat bell crank to the rudder pedals were connected to the bell crank. The 
interconnect control rod from the left to the right rudder bell crank was found connected to the 
right bell crank and separated from the left bell crank.
The left and right rudder pedals were fire damaged, and were separated forward of the control 
rods. The left rudder cable was attached to the right bell crank and was separated aft of its 
turnbuckle. The cable was forwarded to the NTSB Laboratory for further analysis. The right 
rudder cable was attached by its safety wire to the right bell crank and separated forward of its 
turnbuckle.  The cable was forwarded to the NTSB laboratory for further analysis. The left and 
right rudder cables extended aft to the aft bell crank. The tail rotor pitch change control was 
continuous from the aft bell crank to both tail rotor blades. 
Page 5 of 9ATL06LA059
Examination of the right rudder control cable by the NTSB Materials Laboratory revealed the 
exposed surfaces displayed corrosion and the surface of the turnbuckle displayed a splatter of 
white metal. These features are commonly observed after a post impact fire (white metal 
spattered on components is normally structural aluminum that had melted, splashed onto that 
component, and eventually solidified). After cleaning, the clevis end was placed in a scanning 
electron microscope (SEM) and the fracture face was examined.  The SEM examination 
revealed that the fracture face displayed ductile dimples, typical of an overload event.
The portions of the left rudder control cable received for examination consisted of a turnbuckle 
and a length of cable that was approximately 8 inches long.  The turnbuckle was still intact and 
wire locked.  As observed on the right turnbuckle, the exposed surfaces displayed corrosion, 
and the surface of the turnbuckle displayed a splatter of white metal, features commonly 
observed after a post impact fire. The SEM examination revealed that the fracture faces on all 
the wires displayed a faceted surface and cracks that followed the grain boundaries, typical of 
an intergranular separation normally associated with an overload fracture at an elevated 
temperature.  Examination of the other end the cable portion revealed clean angular sheared 
faces on the individual wires in the cable, consistent with the cable being cut after fire 
exposure.
The left and right collective pitch was connected to one another, received fire damage, and was 
not connected to the airframe. The collective pitch tie rod was connected to the collective pitch 
assembly at the forward end and the collective bell crank assembly at the aft end. The collective 
pitch bell crank assembly was separated from the airframe and the lateral and longitudinal 
control linkage. The mixture control was in the full rich position at the fuel servo. The throttle 
cable was fire damaged and separated 6-inches aft of the throttle gear and torque tube 
assembly. The throttle stops on the fuel servo was consumed by fire and the position of the 
throttle control could not be confirmed. The throttle plate was fully open. 
The left and right cyclic control sticks remained attached to the cyclic control tube assembly 
and were not connected to the airframe. The left cyclic lateral tie rod assembly remained 
attached to the forward lateral control arm. The right cyclic lateral control tie rod assembly was 
separated from the forward lateral control arm. The aft lateral control arm was separated from 
the lateral control tube. The longitudinal control rod remained attached to the cyclic control 
tube and longitudinal control arm. The right vertical lateral control tube was separated from 
the lateral control arm at the bottom and from the swash plate assembly at the top. The vertical 
longitudinal control rod was separated at the lateral control arm at the bottom and from the 
swash plate assembly at the top. The left vertical lateral control tube was separated from the 
lateral control arm at the bottom and from the swash plate assembly at the top. All pitch 
change links in the hub remained attached at both ends except for the pitch change link on the 
yellow main rotor blade which separated at the top threaded end of the pitch change link.
The rotor system with the transmission attached separated from the engine at the clutch 
assembly. The centrifugal clutch assembly remained attached to the engine. The telephone guy 
wire was wrapped around the outboard hinge of the yellow main rotor blade. The telephone 
wire came over the top of the yellow main rotor blade and under the blue main rotor blade near 
the rotor hub.
The forward firewall was bent and fire damaged. The left and right rotor mounts were bent, fire 
damaged, and separated near the transmission. Recovery personnel cut the left rotor mount. 
The left and right side of the engine compartment airframe received fire damage. The stainless 
Page 6 of 9ATL06LA059
steel deck was bent and fire damaged. The aluminum deck was bent. The fuel tanks were 
ruptured and fire damaged. The aft firewall was bent and fire damaged. The top cowling 
assembly was fire damaged, bent, and remained attached to the airframe.
The engine remained attached to the airframe at the engine mounts and received fire damage. 
The left and right exhaust assemblies remained attached to the engine. The air filter and the 
ducting from the air filter to the fuel servo were destroyed by fire. The fuel servo remained 
attached to the engine but was partially consumed by fire. The fuel flow divider remained 
attached to the engine. The fuel manifold was removed and examined. The diaphragm was 
intact and no contamination was noted. The fuel injectors were removed and unobstructed. 
The engine driven fuel pump received fire damage. The fuel pump was removed and could not 
be rotated, and the spline drive was intact. The electric fuel pump received fire damage, and the 
motor armature could not be rotated. The induction tube couplings at the fuel servo were 
consumed by fire. The induction tubes remained attached to the engine. The belt driven engine 
cooling fans remained attached to the airframe. The cooling fan drive belt was destroyed by 
fire. The oil cooler remained attached to the airframe and no damage was noted. The oil cooler 
hoses received fire damage. The oil sump remained attached to the engine and oil was present 
on the engine oil dipstick. The starter and generator remained attached to the engine. The 
generator belt was consumed by fire. The starter bendix pinion was retracted. Both magnetos 
and the ignition leads received fire damage, and could not be rotated.
The overrunning clutch and rag coupling separated from the centrifugal clutch. The spline gear 
inside the overrunning clutch was turned by hand freely in the counterclockwise direction and 
locks in the clockwise direction. The centrifugal clutch was removed from the engine and 
disassembled. Corrosion was present in the centrifugal clutch and on the clutch friction plates. 
Normal wear was present on the clutch plates and clutch facing. The clutch spring and tube 
assembly was present with grease. The pinion bearing was separated from the pinion-bearing 
adapter on top of the flywheel plate, and was not located. The planetary transmission moved 
freely 360-degrees when turned by hand. 
The yellow main rotor blade remained attached to the rotor hub. The top leading edge of the 
inboard main rotor blade was damaged. The outboard main rotor blade separated outboard of 
the hinge block. The blue main rotor blade remained attached to the main rotor hub. The 
trailing edge of the inboard main rotor blade was fire damaged. The top and bottom of the 
leading edge of the inboard main rotor blade was damaged. The outboard main rotor blade 
separated outboard of the hinge block. The red main rotor blade remained attached to the main 
rotor hub. The inboard control tube was bent. The trailing edge of the main inboard rotor blade 
was bent and separated from the control tube. The leading edge of the inboard main rotor 
blade was separated and not located. The outboard main rotor blade separated outboard of the 
hinge block. One outboard main rotor blade was recovered but not identified as red, blue, or 
yellow.
The aft fuselage section near the forward end received fire damage. The baggage compartment 
was fire damaged. The baggage compartment door was open, bent, and fire damaged. The aft 
fuselage at the oil cooler skin and right hand side was bent. The tail cone was bent aft of the 
stabilizer. The right stabilizer was bent and separated. The vertical tail pylon was bent and torn 
7-inches down from the upper tail rotor gearbox.
The extension tail rotor drive shaft was bent and separated from the tail rotor tube drive shaft 
(long horizontal shaft). The tail rotor drive shaft (long horizontal shaft) and housing were bent 
Page 7 of 9ATL06LA059
at the tail cone at the No.10 hangar bearing. The intermediate and upper tail rotor gearboxes 
were intact. Both tail rotor blades are wrinkled on the trailing edge. The tail rotor guard was 
separated and not recovered.
The engine was partially disassembled. The starter ring gear was intact. The crankshaft and 
crankshaft flange were intact. The left and right ignition harnesses were destroyed by fire. The 
top and bottom spark plugs were removed and exhibited "worn out normal" when compared to 
the Champion Check A Plug chart. The No. 2 and No. 4 cylinder top spark plugs were oily, and 
the bottom spark plugs were oil soaked. The engine was rotated using a drive tool inserted as 
an adapter into the fuel pump drive. Compression and suction was obtained at all cylinders. 
Continuity was established from the crank shaft to the rear gears. The rocker arms and valves 
moved when the crankshaft was rotated. The oil suction screen pressure screen was removed, 
opened, and was free of contaminants. The oil pressure screen was removed, opened, and free 
of metallic contaminants.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot was transported to the University of Alabama Medical Center, Birmingham, Alabama, 
with serious injuries. Law enforcement did not request toxicology samples from the pilot.
 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
 The aircraft and pilot logbooks were released to the FAA Coordinator on April 5, 2006. The  
helicopter wreckage and components retained for further examination by the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory was released to Atlanta Air Recovery on June 8, 2006. T
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2006
Flight Time:
160 hours (Total, all aircraft), 84 hours (Total, this make and model), 81 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 8 of 9ATL06LA059
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Brantly Helicopter
Registration:
N2183U
Model/Series:
B2B 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
345
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1405 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IVO-360-A1A
Registered Owner:
Peter J. Spinelli Jr.
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Peter J. Spinelli Jr.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
3A1, 969 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1800 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
50°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Madison, AL 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Cullman, AL 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
34.097222, -86.947222
Page 9 of 9
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Carrol A Smith
Adopted Date:
10/03/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Jose Carreras; Birmingham FSDO-09; Birmingham, AO
Mike Childers; Textron Lycoming; Elizabethton, TN
Gilles Lehoux; Brantly; Vernon, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
