The pilot reported that while approaching his private airstrip to land, he reduced the engine 
power to idle, 'pulled on the carburetor heat,' and glided for 3 to 5 minutes. He also reported 
that he never 'cleared his engine' during this glide. Subsequently, he realized the approach 
would be 'short' and that additional power would be needed to reach the airstrip. He moved the 
throttle forward, but there was no increased power response. The pilot further stated that the 
airplane was very low to the ground, and there was not enough room to maneuver. During a 
forced landing, the airplane impacted transmission wires and then the ground. The 
temperature and dew point were 75 and 53 degrees, respectively. According to icing probability 
charts, conditions were favorable for carburetor ice. 
The pilot's improper planning/decision, his failure to periodically clear the engine during the 
glide, and failure to see-and-avoid the transmission line during the approach for an emergency 
landing. 
 On December 2, 1995, at 1400 central standard time, an Aviat A-1, N236CD, registered to and 
operated by a private owner under Title 14 CFR Part 91 was substantially damaged during a 
forced landing following a power loss near Collinsville, Oklahoma. The private pilot sustained 
minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross country flight that 
originated at Vinita, Oklahoma, approximately 45 minutes before the accident.  No flight plan 
was filed.
The pilot reported in his Pilot/Operator Report and during a telephonic interview with the 
investigator-in-charge that he was approaching his private airstrip to land.  He reduced the 
engine power to idle, pulled on the carburetor heat, and glided for 3 to 5 minutes during the 
approach for landing (the pilot reported that he never "cleared his engine" during this glide).  
He realized that he was "short", and needed power to make the airstrip.  He moved the throttle 
forward and there was no increased power response.  The pilot further stated that he was very 
low to the ground and had no room to maneuver.  During the forced landing, the airplane 
impacted transmission wires and the ground.
Evaluation of the weather, at the time of the accident, revealed a temperature of 75 degrees and 
dew point of 53 degrees.  The enclosed icing probability curve chart indicates that this float 
type carbureted engine was being operated in a region of serious carburetor icing conditions.
