The pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was to check the cyclic rigging on the helicopter.  
This was to be the helicopter's first flight in three years since it was recently taken out of 
storage.  After start up, the helicopter rolled over.  The pilot stated that the cause of the 
accident was the over adjusting of the cycle control during the rigging procedure. The pilot has 
performed all inspections and rigging on the helicopter.  Review of the pilot's logbook revealed 
that the pilot did not hold a valid medical, airman certificate, nor the student pilot 
endorsements required to operate the helicopter. The pilot also did not possess a Repairman 
Certificate. 
the pilot's improper maintenance of the helicopter.  Factors in the accident were the pilot's lack 
of proper certification for the operation of the helicopter and his lack of recent experience in 
type of aircraft. 
 On December 2, 1995, at 1505 central standard time, an Eckley Rotorway helicopter, N50235, 
piloted by the owner/builder, sustained substantial damage when it rolled over after start up at 
Salina Municipal Airport, Salina, Kansas.  The non- certificated pilot reported no injuries.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 14 CFR Part 91 local flight, no flight plan was 
filed. 
During a telephone interview, the pilot reported that the helicopter had been in storage for the 
past three years.  This was to be the helicopter's first flight since taken out of storage.  The pilot 
stated the purpose of the flight was to check the cyclic rigging.  He stated that he has performed 
all inspections and rigging on the helicopter.
The pilot stated that the cause of the accident was the over adjusting of the cycle control during 
the rigging procedure which caused the rollover.  
Review of the pilot's logbook revealed the pilot did not hold a valid medical, airman certificate, 
nor the student pilot endorsements required to operate the helicopter.  The pilot had no recent 
flying experience during the past three years.  The pilot also did not possess a Repairman 
Certificate.
