The pilot obtained a weather briefing about 1 hour and 15 minutes prior to the balloon flight. 
About 30 to 35 minutes into the flight, winds increased, and the balloon was pushed over a 
wilderness area with ridges and canyons. Several approaches were abandoned due to power 
lines.  Winds increased to 35 knots and the passengers were briefed for a hard landing. During 
the landing, the pilot was ejected from the balloon.  Passengers grabbed the vent line and 
continued to pull until the balloon came to a stop.  The total drag distance was 300 to 400 feet. 
the high winds and the pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control. 
 On December 2, 1995, at 0930 mountain standard time, a Thunder & Colt, AX9-140, N9606A, 
dragged the basket while landing near Gallup, New Mexico.  The commercial pilot was 
seriously injured and her six passengers were not injured.  The balloon was being operated by 
the owner/operator under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The local flight originated about 1 hour before 
the accident.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed. 
During interviews, conducted by the FAA inspector, and on the enclosed Pilot/Operator report, 
the following information was stated.  The pilot obtained a weather briefing about 1 hour and 
15 minutes prior to the flight.  About 30 to 45 minutes into the flight, the wind "increased 
significantly beyond the forecast."  The winds pushed the balloon over a wilderness area with 
"high ridges, deep and narrow canyons."  Several approaches beyond the wilderness were 
abandoned due to power lines.  During the aborted attempts, the winds was increasing in 
velocity.  About 5 minutes before landing the passengers were briefed on the "high wind 
landing procedures." 
Police personnel at the landing site a few minutes after the accident measured the wind to be 
260 degrees at 25 knots.  They also reported that the winds "had forced the basket to turn over" 
and the pilot was "ejected at the second hit."  Realizing that the balloon was dragging along 
without a pilot, the passengers grabbed the vent line and continued to pull it until the balloon 
came to a stop.  The total drag distance was approximately 300 to 400 feet.  The chase crew 
reported the winds "were traveling 30-35 mph."
