The pilot reported that he was landing on runway 3 at a private airport, and the wind was from 
240 degrees at 10 gusting 20 knots. According to the pilot, the runway was a grass strip about 
1,400 feet long. He reported that the airplane touched down about one third of the way down 
the grass strip, and he was unable to stop on the remaining runway. Subsequently, the airplane 
went off the departure end of the runway, down an embankment, and into brush and trees. An 
FAA inspector examined the airplane after the accident and reported that there was no 
evidence of a preimpact mechanical malfunction. 
the pilot's improper planning/decision during the approach/landing phase of flight.  Related 
factors were: the pilot's selection of the wrong runway, and the gusty tailwind conditions. 
 On December 1, 1995, at about 1430 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172K, N84460, sustained 
substantial damage when it ran off the departure end of the runway while landing at a private 
grass strip in Lovingston, Virginia.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, no flight plan was filed.  The personal flight was 
conducted under 14 CFR 91 and originated at Palmyra, Virginia, at about 1400.
The pilot reported that he set up for the recommended approach to runway 3.  He stated that 
"...winds were [out of approximately] 240 degrees at 10 knots gusting to 20 knots.  I landed 
about one third down the runway, but was unable to stop before reaching the end, and went 
over the embankment, down a small hill into brush and trees."
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Safety Inspector, the pilot reported that 
he was practicing landings at the grass strip when the accident occurred.  The FAA Safety 
Inspector stated that the airplane was examined at the accident site and there was no evidence 
of preimpact mechanical malfunction.  The pilot reported that the grass runway was 1,400 feet 
long, and that there was no mechanical malfunction.
