Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MORICHES, NY
Accident Number:
NYC98LA037
Date & Time:
12/01/1997, 1900 EST 
Registration:
N758YR
Aircraft:
Cessna A152
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The instructor preflighted the airplane and measured the fuel quantity with a calibrated stick, 
with 8 gallons in one tank, and 7 gallons in the other tank.  After takeoff, the airplane had been 
cruising at 2,700 feet for about 1 hour when the instructor reported that they lost all or most 
engine power.  The engine backfired 4 or 5 times and all attempts to restore engine power were 
unsuccessful.  The instructor performed a forced landing to a parking lot and the airplane's left 
wing struck a light pole.  Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration 
Inspector revealed that one wing fuel tank was ripped open, but neither wing fuel tank 
contained fuel and there was no odor of fuel on the ground.  Refueling records revealed that 
after the airplane had been refueled to 20 total gallons, it was flown about 8/10 hours before 
the accident flight.  The average fuel consumption of the engine had been 6.8 gallons per hour.  
According to a carburetor icing probability chart, the conditions at the time of the accident 
were conducive for 'serious icing at cruise power.' 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
Page 2 of 6NYC98LA037
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS
2. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
Findings
3. OBJECT - POLE
Page 3 of 6NYC98LA037
Factual Information
 On December 1, 1997, at 1900 eastern standard time, a Cessna A152, N758YR, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing and collision with a light pole near Moriches, 
New York.  The certificated flight instructor and private pilot received serious injuries.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that originated at the Francis S. Gabreski 
Airport (FOK), New York, about 1745.  No flight plan had been filed for the instructional flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the flight instructor, the purpose of the flight was to provide the private pilot with 
an area familiarization and begin "a week-long biennial flight review."  The instructor 
preflighted the airplane and measured the fuel quantity with a calibrated stick.  He measured 8 
gallons of fuel in one tank, and about 7 gallons in the other tank.  
The instructor stated that after cruising at 2,700 feet for about 1 hour, "...we lost all or most 
engine power output.  All attempts to restore engine power were unsuccessful.  The engine 
backfired 4 or 5 times after that."  He tuned in the Brookhaven Airport frequency and turned 
on the runway light.  He further stated, "I decided that I could not make the runway 33 fighting 
strong winds, and I turned toward a well lighted parking  lot...turning short base I saw high 
trees on the west side of the site and elected to land on the east side which turned out to be a 
narrow road."  
During the final approach the airplane's left wing struck a light pole and the instructor then 
"lost control."
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, examination of the airplane 
revealed that one wing fuel tank was ripped open, but neither wing fuel tank contained fuel and 
there was no odor of fuel on the ground.  The FAA Inspector also stated that one of the police 
officers that initially responded to the accident, also a pilot, reported no odor of fuel at the 
scene.  Examination of the propeller revealed no rotational scoring on the blades.  
The instructor reported that the airplane's fuel consumption was about 5.5 gallons per hour,  
and that of the 26 gallon fuel capacity, 24.5 gallons were useable.
The instructor provided a refueling summary of the accident airplane, which included Hobbs 
and engine tachometer hours, and the number of gallons added during the past 32 hours of 
operations.  The summary did not include any dates; however, the instructor stated that this 
was the current refueling record of the airplane.  Hand written notes on the summary revealed 
that most refuelings did not fill the tanks up, but refueled the airplane to 18, 19, or 20 gallons.  
At a Tach time of 48.9, the fuel tanks were filled.  The next refueling of the tanks to a full level 
occurred at a Tach time of 56.6.  During the 7.7 hours, 52.9 gallons of fuel were added.  When 
divided out, this provided a rate of 6.87 gallons per hour (GPH).  According to the summary, 
the last refueling occurred at a Tach time of 66.1, where the airplane was refueled to a total of 
20 gallons.  At the time of the accident, the approximate Tach time was 68.0.
According to a carburetor icing probability chart, the conditions at the time of the accident 
were conducive for "serious icing at cruise power."
Page 4 of 6NYC98LA037
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/06/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
8200 hours (Total, all aircraft), 26 hours (Total, this make and model), 8000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 110 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N758YR
Model/Series:
A152 A152
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic; Utility
Serial Number:
A1521016
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4868 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-N2C
Registered Owner:
DAEDALUS FLIGHT SCHOOL
Rated Power:
108 hp
Operator:
DAEDALUS FLIGHT SCHOOL
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC98LA037
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FOK, 67 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1845 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Visibility
8 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 25 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
WESTHAMPTON BCH, NY 
(FOK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1745 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
BROOKHAVEN (HWV)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     L PEARCE
Adopted Date:
02/28/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
RONALD   HUGHES; FARMINGDALE, NY
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC98LA037
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
