National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NOATAK, AK
Accident Number: ANC97TA045
Date & Time: 04/01/1997, 1145 AST
Registration: N4500W
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot, an employee of the National Park Service, related he was returning to his position as a Park Ranger/Pilot after a three month furlough from the park service.
The purpose of the accident flight was to regain proficiency in the Piper PA-18 airplane.
The pilot said that during the landing roll on the fourth landing, he lost directional control of the airplane, and it ground looped to the left, which resulted in substantial damage to the airframe.
Also, the pilot said he did not fly during his furlough, and that his total flight experience in the PA-18 airplane was approximately five hours.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane, which resulted in an inadvertent ground loop and damage to the airplane.
Factors associated with the accident were: the ice/snow covered runway, and the pilot's lack of experience in the make and model of airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 2.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - ICY 3.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
The solo commercial pilot, a NPS employee, was not injured.
The U.S. Government operated flight was initiated for the purpose of maintaining pilot flight proficiency, and operated in visual meteorological conditions under 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight last departed Kotzebue, Alaska, and the immediate destination was the Noatak Airport.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge on April 3, the pilot related he was returning to work with the NPS as a Park Ranger/Pilot, after a three month furlough.
Since he had not flown during the time he was furloughed, he felt a need to practice his flying skills prior to a mission flight planned for the next day.
The pilot was making a series of full stop landings at the Noatak Airport on wheel/ski equipped landing gear with the skis retracted.
On the fourth landing on runway 36, the pilot said the airplane porpoised and bounced, and then went to the left during the landing roll.
He said he overcorrected to the right, and then to the left.
The airplane ground looped to the left, and came to rest facing in a westerly direction.
Postaccident inspection disclosed damage to a longeron and the horizontal stabilizer.
The written report submitted to the NTSB by the pilot indicated his total flight experience in a Piper PA-18 airplane was approximately five hours at the time of the accident.
: 1750 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 21 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3109 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320-B2B Registered Owner: U.S. DEPT.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
