National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ATLANTIC CITY, NJ
Accident Number: IAD97LA057
Date & Time: 04/01/1997, 2220 EST
Registration: N280MA
Aircraft: Fokker F-27
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 37 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis While taxiing, the pilot observed a van travelling in reverse motion, moving from the pilot's left to right.
The pilot signaled the van with the landing lights to attract the driver's attention, but the van passed the nose of the airplane.
The pilot stopped the airplane, and the van continued and struck the right rear fuselage of the airplane.
The investigation revealed that the driver had exited the running van to work on another airplane, without setting the parking brake.
The van's transmission had been replaced the day of the accident, and the indicator for the gear selection was missing from the steering column.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Failure of the driver of the van to set the parking brake before exiting the van.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: STANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
The certificated airline transport pilot, co- pilot, flight attendant and the 34 passengers were not injured, while one passenger received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for charter passenger flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
The pilot reported that while taxiing slowly through the ramp area, he observed a van approaching the airplane from the "10 to 11 o'clock position."
He said the van was travelling in reverse motion from left to right.
He signaled the van with the landing lights, but the van passed the nose of the airplane in a curving turn.
He stopped the airplane, but the driverless van continued in reverse until it struck the right rear fuselage.
According to the driver of the maintenance van, he had exited the running van to work on another airplane without setting the parking brake.
He had placed the gear shift handle in the park position.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, the van's transmission was replaced the day of the accident, and the gear selection indicator on the steering column was missing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 45000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 55 Hours Engines: 2 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 39716 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Rolls-Royce ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: DART 532-7R Registered Owner: EAGLE JET CHARTER INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
