National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BROWNFIELD, TX
Accident Number: FTW96LA374
Date & Time: 09/01/1996, 1145 CDT
Registration: N1502F
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-401
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis According to the operator, during the landing on a private ag-strip, a slight crosswind resulted in the airplane diverting into an adjacent cotton field.
The airplane bounced across soft crop rows for 60 feet to 70 feet until the left landing gear collapsed, at which point the left wing struck the ground and the motor/prop struck the ground subsequently flipping the aircraft completely over.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing roll.
A factor was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Factual Information On September 1, 1996, at 1145 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-401, N1502F, was substantially damaged during landing near Brownfield, Texas.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Foshee Flying Service under Title 14 CFR Part 137.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local aerial application flight which originated from a private Ag-strip approximately 45 minutes before the accident.
A flight plan was not filed.
The operator stated, in the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, that during the landing on a private ag-strip, a "slight crosswind" resulted in the airplane diverting into an adjacent cotton field.
"The plane was bouncing across soft crop rows for 60 feet to 70 feet until the left landing gear collapsed, at which point the left wing struck the ground and the motor/prop struck the ground subsequently flipping the aircraft completely over."
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 7860 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 299 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1711 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: R-1340 Registered Owner: FOSHEE SPRAYING SERVICE, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
