National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FRISCO, TX
Accident Number: FTW96LA375
Date & Time: 09/01/1996, 1730 CDT
Registration: N9558F
Aircraft: Hughes 269B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the operator, the pilot requested to rent a helicopter.
He showed the operator his pilot certificate and flight log book; however, the operator did not record this information nor obtain a current address and telephone number.
The pilot was not given a check out in the helicopter prior to the accident flight.
The operator observed the pilot hover the helicopter, takeoff and depart the traffic pattern.
The operator subsequently received a telephone call from the pilot stating he had landed the helicopter 'hard' at the North Dallas Jetport, which was under construction, and requested to be pick up.
When the operator arrived at the North Dallas Jetport, he found the helicopter on its side, and the pilot could not be located.
Injury is presumed.
There were no reported eye witnesses to this accident.
The FAA has no record of the named pilot having either an airman or a medical certificate.
.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper touchdown procedure.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) TOUCHDOWN - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed.
The pilot was reported as not injured.
The local flight originated from Addison Airport, Dallas, Texas, about 30 minutes before the accident.
According to the operator, the pilot requested to rent a helicopter.
He showed the operator his pilot certificate and flight log book; however, the operator did not record this information nor obtain a current address and telephone number.
The pilot was not given a check out in the helicopter prior to the accident flight; however, the operator observed the pilot hover the helicopter, takeoff and depart the traffic pattern.
The operator received a telephone call from the pilot stating he had landed the helicopter "hard" at the North Dallas Jetport, which was under construction, and requested to be pick up.
When the operator arrived at the North Dallas Jetport, he found the helicopter on its side, and the pilot could not be located.
There were no reported eye witnesses to this accident.
The FAA has no record of the named pilot having either an airman or a medical certificate.
: 1670 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Engine Model/Series: HIO-360-A1A Registered Owner: C AND J COMMUNICATIONS, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
