National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TYONEK, AK
Accident Number: ANC96LA133
Date & Time: 09/01/1996, 2400 AKD
Registration: N4393Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot landed the airplane at an off airport landing site.
He attempt to take off from the area during the hours of dusk.
He stated the airplane's tail lifted off the ground during the takeoff roll, and then the airplane lifted off prematurely.
After becoming airborne, the airplane drifted to the right, then the left wing struck muskeg, and the airplane settled into brush.
The pilot stated he tried to stop the drift by applying full left rudder and full left aileron.
The pilot also stated he felt the airplane's right wing stalled.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's premature liftoff and subsequent inadvertent stall.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) LIFT-OFF - PREMATURE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 3.
The personal flight, operating  under 14 CFR Part 91, was departing during dusk, and the destination was Anchorage, Alaska.
No flight plan was filed and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The certificated private pilot and the passenger were not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
During a telephone conversation with the pilot, he stated that he was taking off from a road near the Theodore River.
The airplane became airborne prematurely and drifted off the right side of the road.
He was unable to stop the drift, despite the application of full left aileron and rudder.
The left wing struck the muskeg and the airplane settled into the brush.
He stated that the airplane was not ready to fly, and believes the right wing stalled.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 36, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
