National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SANTA FE, NM
Accident Number: FTW96LA367
Date & Time: 09/01/1996, 1808 MDT
Registration: N103HJ
Aircraft: Jackson SONERAI I
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was on a flight from Questa, New Mexico, to Moriarty, New Mexico.
After departing Questa, an intermediate stop was made at Taos Municipal Airport, Taos, New Mexico, for fuel; however, there was no fuel available.
Approximately 24 minutes after departing Taos, while in cruise flight at 9,500 feet MSL, the engine lost power.
A forced landing was made in an open field, and during the landing roll, the airplane 'flipped over the nose.'
A witness reported hearing the airplane's engine 'stop,' and observed the airplane in a 'glide.'
The witness also heard the engine 'start and stop' several times.
An examination of the fuel system revealed that the expansion fuel cap had separated during ground impact, and the only evidence of fuel was a slight odor.
The pilot reported that there was no fuel visible on the clear plastic tube, which served as a fuel quantity gauge at the time the engine lost power.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper planning/decision, which resulted in fuel exhaustion due to an inadequate supply of fuel.
The lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing was a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 4.
(C) FUEL SUPPLY - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 6.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries.
The flight originated from Questa, New Mexico, about 1723, and was en route to Moriarty, New Mexico.
The pilot reported the following information to the FAA inspector.
The first leg of the flight from Moriarty to Questa took approximately one hour.
After arriving at Questa he was unable to start the aircraft for the second leg of the flight.
Both engine magnetos were replaced.
After departing Questa, an intermediate stop was made at Taos Municipal Airport, Taos, New Mexico, for fuel.
However, there was no fuel available.
Approximately 24 minutes after departing Taos, while in cruise flight at 9,500 feet MSL, the engine lost power.
A forced landing was initiated to an open field, and during the landing roll, the aircraft "flipped over the nose."
A witness reported in a written statement observing and hearing the following information.
The airplane appeared to be attempting to land at the Santa Fe Airport.
At approximately 1,000 feet AGL the airplane's engine lost total power.
While the airplane was in a "glide," he heard the engine try to restart several times; however, each time it only "sputtered and quit."
An examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed damage to the rudder, the landing gear, both wing tips, and the fuselage.
An examination of the fuel system revealed that the expansion fuel cap had separated during ground impact, and the only evidence of fuel was a slight odor.
The pilot reported to the FAA inspector that there was no fuel visible on the clear plastic tube which serves as a fuel quantity gauge, at the time the engine lost power.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Private Age: 28, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
