National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Greene, NY
Accident Number: ERA14LA418
Date & Time: 09/01/2014, 1200 EDT
Registration: N94SL
Aircraft: LORENZ STEPHEN KITFOX   SERIES 5
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot, who had no previous experience in the airplane make and model, had purchased it about 1 year earlier and then stored it in his garage until the day of the accident.
On the day of the accident, the pilot added 4 gallons of gas; he subsequently started the engine, taxied the airplane, and conducted engine run-ups for about 30 minutes to familiarize himself with the airplane.
He powered up the engine three or four times, and during the last power up, the airplane lifted off.
The pilot reported that he then attempted a three-point landing; this is all that he remembered about the accident sequence.
A witness reported that, after takeoff, the airplane ﬁjerkedﬂ right and that the power settings changed.
The airplane then ﬁstraightened out and smoothed outﬂ and then continued to climb slowly to about 200 ft above the ground, at which point it banked ﬁhardﬂ left and then descended to impact.
Another witness reported that the airplane ﬁtippedﬂ and ﬁstalledﬂ before its descent.
A postcrash fire ensued, which consumed most of the airplane.
No preexisting mechanical anomalies were found that would have precluded normal operation, and the pilot reported no preexisting mechanical malfunctions or failures.
Wind recorded at an airport about 10 miles from the departure airport about the time of the accident was from the direction of takeoff at 4 knots, and a witness noted that both windsocks were ﬁdeadﬂ at the accident airport.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot™s failure to attain adequate airspeed during the initial climb, which resulted in an exceedance of the wing™s critical angle-of-attack and a subsequent aerodynamic stall.
Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s lack of experience in the airplane make and model.
The private pilot was seriously injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local flight from Greene Airport (4N7), Greene, New York.
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot, he and his wife purchased the airplane in October 2013, and it was stored in their garage until the day before the accident.
On the day of the accident, the pilot added 4 gallons of gas before starting the engine, taxiing and performing engine run ups to familiarize himself with the airplane.
He powered up the engine three or four times, and during the last time, "wind lifted the aircraft."
The pilot then "tried to make 3 point ground contact and that is the last [he] remembered."
According to several witnesses, the pilot initially taxied and did control checks for about 30 minutes before taking off [from runway 25].
One witness noted that upon takeoff, the airplane "jerked" to the right, and the witness could hear changes in power settings.
The airplane then "straightened out and smoothed out."
About 200 feet above the ground, and while "slow, climbing, banked hard left, up on wingtip," then "continued to impact."
Other witnesses stated that the airplane "tipped" and "stalled" prior to its descent.
A witness who responded to the accident stated that upon reaching the airplane, it was on fire and he pulled the pilot away from it.
He asked the pilot what happened, and the pilot stated that, "wind was an issue."
However, the witness further noted that at the time of the accident, "both windsocks at 4N7 were dead."
The airplane was mostly consumed in a postcrash fire.
Neither the pilot nor any witness, nor the responding Federal Aviation Administration inspector reported any preexisting mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot also checked "No" to the question "Was there mechanical malfunction/failure?"
on his submitted NTSB Pilot/Operator Report.
The pilot further reported no previous experience in airplane make and model.
Weather was not recorded at the airport.
The nearest recorded weather, at  an airport 10 nm to the southwest, at 1153, included wind from 250 degrees true at 4 knots.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89996
