This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Mountain Home, ID
Accident Number: WPR18LA163
Date & Time: 06/02/2018, 1338 MDT
Registration: N62073
Aircraft: BUCHANAN DAN PULSE 10 METER
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Air Race/Show
On June 2, 2018, about 1338 mountain daylight time, an experimental amateur-built North 
Wing (Dan Buchanan) Pulse 10 Meter hang glider, N62073, collided with the ground while 
participating in an airshow at Mountain Home Air Force Base (KMUO), Mountain Home, 
Idaho. The commercial pilot sustained fatal injuries and the hang glider sustained substantial 
damage. The hang glider was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 
Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91. The local flight departed KMUO, about 1332. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The premise of the pilot's airshow routine was a comedy act, in which he would simulate 
inadvertently flying the hang glider into an active airshow, interrupting another airplane that 
was performing an aerobatic routine. The plan was for the hang glider, which was equipped 
with smoke canisters and a series of trailing streamers, to be towed past show-center while the 
aerobatic airplane made a series of close passes, eventually cutting the streamers. Throughout 
the routine, the rehearsed radio interactions between the hang glider pilot, aerobatic pilot, and 
the show announcer were to be transmitted over the public-address system.
During a typical airshow, the hang glider was launched by a moving tow-launch system 
composed of a winch trailer pulled by a truck. The truck and trailer then travelled back and 
forth down the runway, simultaneously spinning out the tow cord, while the winch operator 
maintained cord tension as the hang glider climbed to altitude (usually 1,500 ft). The hang 
glider pilot typically releases the cord once the truck had turned around after the third pass. 
The hang glider would then begin to perform a series gliding maneuvers down to the ground, 
while the cord, which was equipped with a parachute, was rewound back into the winch spool 
as it slowly descended.
On the day of the accident, the performance began and progressed uneventfully until the end of 
the third runway pass. After being given the all-clear by the hang glider pilot, the truck and 
winch trailer turned around as planned, and began to accelerate back along runway 12 in 
anticipation of the pilot releasing the cord. The winch operator stated that a few seconds after 
the turn, he looked up and noticed the hang glider was about 500 ft below the altitude he 
would typically expect to see it. The hang glider then performed an aggressive turning 
maneuver, and descended another 500 ft. The winch operator then released the winch 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
pressure, in an effort to allow more slack to the hang glider to prevent it from being impeded 
by cord tension. The hang glider then began to climb, roll left, and strike the ground nose-
down.
Multiple witnesses, including the Air Boss, who had seen the routine performed many times 
before, all recounted similar observations, and all stated that the maneuvers after the third 
pass were completely unconventional, and not part of the routine.
Post-accident examination revealed that the hang glider sustained substantial damage to the 
nose junction assembly and downtubes, with the remaining sail structure and support 
components largely intact. Multiple witnesses reported to news media that the tow cord was 
cut by the aerobatic airplane during the routine, however, examination revealed that the cord 
was intact and undamaged. Preliminary review of surveillance and witness videos indicated 
that the tow cord was still attached to the hang glider at the time of ground impact.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: BUCHANAN DAN
Registration: N62073
Model/Series: PULSE 10 METER NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Weight-Shift
Amateur Built: Yes
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KMUO, 2996 ft msl
Observation Time: 1949 UTC
Distance from Accident Site: 1 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 24°C / 0°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 0 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 3 knots / , 230°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.25 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Mountain Home, ID (MUO)
Destination: Mountain Home, ID
(MUO)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 43.041667, -115.871667
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Eliott Simpson
Additional Participating Persons: Kenneth Hawkins; Federal Aviation Administration FSDO; Boise, ID
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
