Page 1 of 12
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
North Hampton, NH
Accident Number:
ERA14FA417
Date & Time:
09/01/2014, 1050 EDT 
Registration:
N6510A
Aircraft:
CESSNA 180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Witnesses reported observing the commercial pilot and passenger departing from the turf 
runway. After a normal takeoff, the airplane's angle of attack (AOA) began to increase, and it 
continued to increase until the airplane's critical AOA was exceeded. The airplane then 
experienced an aerodynamic stall and entered an uncontrolled descent. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane, including the flight controls and stall warning 
system, and the engine revealed no evidence of any preaccident mechanical failures or 
malfunctions that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot had reported that he had hypertension, gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD), and 
high cholesterol and that he was using lisinopril, pantoprazole, and simvastatin to treat those 
conditions to the Federal Aviation Administration. However, given that high blood pressure 
and high cholesterol cause no direct symptoms and that no evidence of a stroke, heart attack, 
or significant natural disease were identified on autopsy, it is unlikely that either of these 
conditions or the medications the pilot was taking to treat them contributed to the accident. 
Further, although GERD can cause heartburn, it is unlikely to have been acute or severe 
enough to have contributed to the accident. 
Postaccident toxicology testing of the pilot's specimens identified significant levels of 
diphenhydramine, which is a sedating antihistamine, in the femoral and cavity blood, 
indicating that it is likely that the pilot's diphenhydramine level was near the middle of the 
therapeutic window at the time of the accident. Even at therapeutic levels, diphenhydramine is 
quite impairing. In fact, in a driving simulator study, a single dose of diphenhydramine 
impaired driving ability more than a blood alcohol concentration of 0.100%. Thus, it is very 
likely that the pilot was impaired by diphenhydramine at the time of the accident. 
Toxicology testing of the passenger's specimens detected a level of zolpidem, which is a short-
acting sedative hypnotic used as a sleep aid, in the heart blood that was at the lower end of the 
therapeutic window and would likely have been significantly lower at the time of the accident. 
Page 2 of 12ERA14FA417
Although it could not be determined with certainty, it is not likely that the passenger was 
significantly impaired by zolpidem at the time of the accident.
The pilot was seated in the left seat; one witness reported seeing his left hand on the 
glareshield as the AOA began to increase whereas another witness reported seeing his hand 
reach for the glareshield as the AOA began to increase. Based on the pilot's reported hand 
position at takeoff, it is possible that he had decided to let the unrated passenger attempt the 
takeoff; however, this could not be definitively determined. In either case (with the passenger 
or the pilot flying), the pilot failed to ensure that the airplane maintained adequate airspeed, 
which led to the airplane exceeding its critical angle of attack. It is likely that the pilot's 
impairment by diphenhydramine contributed to the accident and led to his poor decision-
making or affected his ability to respond to the stall quickly.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to ensure the airplane maintained adequate airspeed during the initial climb 
and the subsequent exceedance of its critical angle of attack, which resulted in an aerodynamic 
stall. Contributing to the accident were the pilot's impairment due to a sedating antihistamine, 
which led to his decision to possibly allow the passenger to attempt the takeoff, and his delayed 
remedial action to lower the nose when the airplane began to pitch up too much.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
OTC medication - Pilot (Factor)
Delayed action - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 12ERA14FA417
Factual Information
History of Flight
Initial climb
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On September 1, 2014, about 1050 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 180, N6510A, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted trees and terrain during the initial climb after takeoff 
from Hampton Airfield (7B3), North Hampton, New Hampshire. The airline transport pilot 
and a passenger were fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight 
plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91, destined for a private airport in Kingston, New Hampshire.
On the day of the accident, the airport was hosting its annual customer appreciation day. As a 
result, numerous witnesses observed the accident.
According to witness statements and video images, the pilot contacted the airport advisory 
frequency from a position approximately 5 miles west of 7B3. The airplane then overflew the 
south end of the airport and the pilot advised that he would be joining the downwind leg of the 
traffic pattern for "Runway 22." The pilot then advised that he was joining the base leg of the 
traffic pattern, and then reported that he was "landing south" without indicating the runway 
number.
The airplane landed normally, and subsequently shutdown at the fuel pumps, at 1023. The 
pilot then refueled the airplane with approximately 31 gallons of 100 LL aviation gasoline, 
which was completed at approximately 1036.
After starting the airplane and taxiing away from the fuel pumps, a witness observed a seat belt 
hanging out of the passenger door. The witness gained the pilot's attention and advised him 
about the seatbelt. The pilot then taxied to runway 02. Witnesses did not observe the pilot 
perform an run-up prior to turning onto the runway, and also noted that the flaps were 
partially extended before the takeoff roll began.
The airplane appeared to takeoff normally with the tailwheel coming off the surface of the 
runway first, followed by the main landing gear wheels. Comparison of video footage to known 
landmarks on the airport indicated that the ground run was approximately 890 feet. After 
liftoff, the airplane's angle of attack began to increase. One witness stated that as the angle of 
attack began to increase, the pilot's left hand reached for the glareshield, while another witness 
observed the pilot's left hand already on the glareshield as the angle of attack began to increase.
Approximately 320 feet later, the airplane's angle of attack was still increasing and the 
airplane's altitude was higher than a group of approximately 73 foot high trees that were 
located adjacent to the west side of the runway. Moments later, the airplane rolled and yawed 
to the left, the angle of attack decreased through a level flight attitude, to a steep nose down 
Page 4 of 12ERA14FA417
attitude, the engine rpm decreased "as if it was being throttled back to idle" and the airplane 
went out of view behind some trees. The sound of impact was then heard.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
77, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/11/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/09/2014
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 20050 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2025 hours (Total, this make and model), 9 hours 
(Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and pilot records, the pilot held an airline 
transport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane multiengine land, with commercial pilot 
privileges for airplane single-engine land, airplane single-engine sea, and type ratings for the 
B-707, B-720, and B-727. He had accrued approximately 20,050 total hours of flight time, 
2,025 of which were in the accident airplane make and model. His most recent FAA third-class 
medical certificate was issued on April 11, 2013.
According to FAA records, the passenger did not hold any pilot certificates and no evidence of 
any flight training for the passenger was found during the investigation.
Page 5 of 12ERA14FA417
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N6510A
Model/Series:
180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1956
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32407
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/06/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
12 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3225 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91A installed, activated, 
did not aid in locating 
accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-K
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The accident aircraft was a four-place, strut braced, high wing airplane of conventional metal 
construction. It was equipped with conventional landing gear, and powered by a Continental 
Motors O-470-K, 230 horsepower engine, that was equipped with a two-blade, variable pitch, 
constant-speed propeller.
According to FAA and airplane maintenance records, it was manufactured in 1956. The 
airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on June 6, 2014. At the time of the 
inspection, the airplane had accrued approximately 3,225 total hours of operation.
Page 6 of 12ERA14FA417
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PSM, 100 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1058 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
290째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28째C / 21째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
North Hampton, NH (7B3)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
KENSINGTON, NH (06NH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1048 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
The reported weather at Portsmouth International Airport (PSM), located 6 nautical miles 
north of the accident site, at 1058, included: wind from 290 degrees at 6 knots, 10 statute miles 
visibility, few clouds at 3,000 feet, temperature 28 degrees C, dew point 21 degrees C, and an 
altimeter setting of 29.95 inches of mercury.
Airport Information
Airport:
HAMPTON AIRFIELD (7B3)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
93 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
02
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2100 ft / 170 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Hampton Airfield was privately-owned, and was located 2 miles north of Hampton, New 
Hampshire. It was classified by the FAA as a non-towered public use airport. The airport 
elevation was 93 feet above mean sea level and there was one runway oriented in a 02/20 
configuration. Runway 02 was turf, and in good condition. The total length was 2,100 foot long 
by 170 foot wide.
Page 7 of 12ERA14FA417
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
42.962778, -70.831389
Examination of the accident site revealed that the airplane struck trees in a nose low, left wing 
down attitude, and then impacted the ground in a 42-degree nose low attitude, on an 
approximate magnetic heading of 220 degrees, before coming to rest. The smell of fuel was 
present, and multiple branches and broken tree limbs displayed evidence of propeller strike 
marks.
Examination of the airplane revealed that the fuselage was broken and bent in several places. 
The wings, which displayed crush and compression damage, were detached from their 
mounting locations, and approximately 2 feet of the outboard left wing was separated.
Flight control continuity was established from the flight controls to the cockpit, and the throttle 
control, mixture control, propeller control, and carburetor heat, were full in. The fuel selector 
valve was in the "BOTH" position, the stabilizer trim wheel was intact and the trim indicator, 
and jackscrew indicated that the stabilizer trim was approximately in the 0-degree (neutral) 
position. The flap handle for the wing flaps was in the 20-degree detent. The pilot and 
passenger seat tracks were equipped with seat stops, and displayed evidence of pullout and 
cracking which was consistent with the seats being in the locked position during the impact.
The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft and both propeller blades remained 
attached to the hub. The propeller blades displayed evidence of S-bending, chordwise 
scratching, and leading edge polishing. The propeller governor remained attached to its 
mounting location, and displayed significant impact damage including impact separation of the 
governor control from the rest of the propeller governor.
The engine intake system sustained damage consistent with impact damage and several intake 
tubes were crushed, dented and bent. A portion of the intake system was separated from the 
rest of the intake system, and a portion remained attached to the carburetor. The exhaust 
system sustained damage consistent with impact damage and displayed crushing, bending, and 
tearing. All of the exhaust risers remained attached to their respective cylinders.
The magnetos remained attached to their respective mounting locations and sustained only 
minor damage. The crankshaft was rotated by hand, and both magnetos produced spark at all 
of their respective ignition leads. All of the spark plugs were present in their respective 
cylinders and were undamaged. When compared to the Champion Aviation Service Manual, all 
of the spark plugs displayed normal operating signatures.
The carburetor sustained damage consistent with impact damage; the idle stop adjustment 
screw installation point remained only partially attached. The carburetor remained attached to 
Page 8 of 12ERA14FA417
a portion of the intake system; however, the attach point had broken free from the rest of the 
intake system. Internal examination of the carburetor revealed that fuel consistent with 100 LL 
aviation gasoline was present in the float bowl. No contaminates were present in the inlet 
screen, and a check of the fuel in the carburetor bowl utilizing water finding paste did not 
indicate the presence of water. Submersion of the carburetor floats in a container of 100LL for 
20 minutes did not reveal any air bubbles and the floats retained their buoyancy.
The oil sump remained attached to its mounting location and displayed impact damage. The oil 
pump gears, housing, and oil pressure relief valve displayed normal operating signatures. The 
oil filter remained attached to the oil filter adapter and displayed impact damage. There were 
no metallic particulates or contaminates discovered in the filter pleats and the oil cooler was 
undamaged.
All of the cylinders remained attached to the engine and the cylinders sustained only minor 
impact damage. Examination of the cylinders with a borescope revealed that the piston faces, 
valve heads, and cylinder bores, all displayed normal operating signatures.
The crankcase remained intact and displayed minor impact damage. The crankshaft remained 
intact and displayed impact damage to the propeller flange.
Thumb compression and suction was established on all cylinders, and all the valves, rocker 
arms, pistons, crankshaft, camshaft, connecting rods, and associated components were noted 
to operate when the crankshaft was rotated by hand.
Medical And Pathological Information
Pilot
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the State of New Hampshire, Office of the Chief 
Medical Examiner. The reported cause of death was blunt impact injuries.
Toxicological testing of the pilot was conducted at the FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The specimens from the pilot were negative for 
ethanol, and basic, acidic, and neutral drugs, with the exception of Diphenhydramine, which 
was detected in urine and blood, and Ibuprofen, which was detected in urine. Testing for 
Carbon Monoxide and Cyanide were not performed.
On April 11, 2013, during his last aviation medical examination, the 77-year old male pilot 
reported a new diagnosis of hypertension as well as long standing gastro-esophageal reflux 
disease (GERD) and high cholesterol. He reported using the medications Lisinopril, 
Pantoprazole, and Simvastatin. He was issued a third class medical certificate limited by a 
requirement to wear corrective lenses for distance vision and possess glasses for near vision. At 
the time, he was 66 inches tall, and weighed 152 pounds.
Page 9 of 12ERA14FA417
Lisinopril is a prescription blood pressure medication commonly sold with the name Vasotec. 
Pantoprazole is a proton pump inhibitor used to treat GERD and other sources of heartburn. It 
is available over the counter with the name Prilosec. Simvastatin is a prescription cholesterol 
lowering agent commonly sold with the name Lipitor.
According to the autopsy report, the examination identified atherosclerotic disease in the aorta 
and some calcification of the coronary arteries without coronary artery stenosis. The remainder 
of the examination was unremarkable.
Toxicology testing performed by the NMS Labs at the request of the Chief Medical Examiner 
identified 0.077 ug/ml of Diphenhydramine in femoral blood and caffeine in chest blood.
Toxicology testing performed by the FAA's Bioaeronautical Research Laboratory identified 
Diphenhydramine and Ibuprofen in urine; 0.432 ug/ml of Diphenhydramine was quantified in 
cavity blood.
Ibuprofen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication used as an analgesic and fever 
reliever; it is available over the counter marketed as Motrin and Advil. Diphenhydramine is a 
sedating antihistamine used to treat cold and allergy symptoms and as a sleep aid. It is 
available over the counter under the trade names Benadryl and Unisom. Diphenhydramine's 
therapeutic window is between 0.0250 ug/ml and 0.1120 ug/ml. It carries the following FDA 
warning: may impair mental and/or physical ability required for the performance of potentially 
hazardous tasks (e.g., driving, operating heavy machinery). Compared to other antihistamines, 
diphenhydramine causes marked sedation; it is also classed as a Central Nervous System (CNS) 
depressant and this is the rationale for its use as a sleep aid. Altered mood and impaired 
cognitive and psychomotor performance may also be observed. In fact, in a driving simulator 
study, a single dose of Diphenhydramine impaired driving ability more than a blood alcohol 
concentration of 0.100%. Diphenhydramine undergoes postmortem redistribution; after death 
it can move back into pooled blood from storage sites. For diphenhydramine, postmortem 
central or cavity blood levels may increase by three times or more.
Passenger
An autopsy was performed on the passenger by the State of New Hampshire, Office of the Chief 
Medical Examiner. The reported cause of death was blunt impact injuries.
Toxicological testing of the passenger was conducted at the FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences 
Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The specimens from the pilot were negative 
for ethanol, and basic, acidic, and neutral drugs, with the exception of Zolpidem, which was 
detected in liver and blood, and Ibuprofen, which was detected in blood. Testing for Carbon 
Monoxide and Cyanide were not performed.
Toxicology testing performed by the FAA's Bioaeronautical Research Laboratory identified 
Ibuprofen and 0.0250 ug/ml of Zolpidem in heart blood as well as of 0.068 ug/ml of Zolpidem 
in liver.
Zolpidem is a short acting sedative hypnotic used as a sleep aid and available by prescription; it 
is commonly called Ambien. Zolpidem's therapeutic window is between 0.0250 and 0.300 
Page 10 of 12ERA14FA417
ug/ml and it carries the following warning: may impair mental and/or physical ability required 
for the performance of potentially hazardous tasks (e.g., driving, operating heavy machinery).
Tests And Research
Pitot Static System
The airspeed indicator, was operated by the pitot static system. This system consisted of a pitot 
tube, mounted under the leading edge of the left wing and two pressure ports (static ports) 
mounted on opposite sides of the fuselage just aft of the firewall. Examination of the pitot tube 
and static pressure ports during the wreckage examination revealed that they were clear of 
obstructions.
Stall Warning System
According to the Cessna 180 Owner's Manual, the aerodynamic stall characteristics were 
conventional for flaps up and flaps down conditions and slight buffeting could occur just before 
the stall with flaps down.
The airplane when at aft center of gravity and full gross weight at sea level would stall with the 
wing flaps set at 20-degrees at a true indicated airspeed (TIAS) of:
55 mph at 0-degrees angle of bank
59 mph at 30-degrees angle of bank
78 mph at 60-degrees angle of bank
To help avoid aerodynamic stalls, the airplane was equipped with a stall warning system. The 
stall warning system was comprised of a stall warning indicator (stall warning horn) which was 
mounted on the back of the glove compartment box, next to the firewall, and an actuating 
switch (stall vane) which was mounted on the leading edge of the left wing and was actuated by 
airflow over the surface of the wing. The switch would close as approximately 5 to 10 mph 
above the airplane stall speed.
According to the Cessna 180 Owner's Manual, the stall warning indicator would provide 
protection from inadvertent stalls. It would give a warning whenever an aerodynamic stall was 
approached, regardless of speed, attitude, altitude, acceleration, or other factors, which could 
change the stalling speed.
Examination of the stall warning system did not reveal any anomalies, and testing of the 
actuating switch with a multimeter, indicated that it was functional.
Use of Wing Flaps
According to the Cessna 180 Owner's Manual, the wing flap control handle was operated by 
depressing the thumb button and moving the handle to the desired flap setting. By releasing 
the thumb button, the handle could be locked to provide 0, 20, 30, and 40-degree flap 
Page 11 of 12ERA14FA417
positions. The flaps could be lowered or raised during normal flying whenever the airspeed was 
less than 100 mph. The wing flaps could supply considerable lift and drag.
For takeoff, the flaps could be selected to the 0-degree (flaps up), or 20-degree (first notch), 
positions.
During the wreckage examination, the wing flap handle was found to be in the 20-degree (first 
notch) position, which according to the Cessna 180 Owner's Manual, would shorten the takeoff 
distance to clear a 50 foot obstacle as a result of slower forward speeds, even though the use of 
wing flaps would lessen the rate of climb. The use of 30 or 40 degrees of wing flaps was not 
recommended at any time for takeoff.
The manual also stated to "REMEMBER" that you "Don't under marginal conditions, leave 
wing flaps on long enough that you are losing both climb and airspeed. Don't raise wing flaps 
with airspeed below "Flaps Up stalling speed" and "Do slowly release the wing flaps as soon as 
you reasonably can after take-off, preferably 50 feet or more over terrain or obstacles."
Preventing Similar Accidents
Understand Impairment Risk
Toxicology tests of pilots involved in fatal aviation accidents increasingly show evidence that a 
wide variety of over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription drugs have been used, including drugs 
that are potentially impairing. Pilots may be using OTC or prescription drugs without realizing 
that they can cause impairment.
Pilot impairment due to the effects of drugs reduces the safety of flight, increases accident risk, 
and is preventable.
Discuss EVERY medication you take regularly, including OTC, prescription, and other drugs, 
with your aviation medical examiner during your medical certification exam. Pilots should 
ensure that anyone prescribing medication for you knows that they are a pilot. Ask if the 
medication is safe to take before or while flying or if there is an alternative that would be less 
likely to cause impairment.
For medications that have a warning about using caution when driving a vehicle, the Federal 
Aviation Administration recommends waiting at least 5 times the longest recommended 
interval between doses before flying to be sure you are safe to fly. For example, if the dosing 
interval states, "take every 4 to 6 hours" that means waiting 30 hours (5 times the longest 
dosing interval of 6 hours). DO NOT FLY if you notice you are feeling sleepy, "out of it," or 
jittery after using any drug. These feelings mean you are probably impaired.
When choosing OTC medications, read the label. If it has a warning that states, "Use caution 
when driving a vehicle or operating machinery," ask the pharmacist if there is something else 
that will not increase your risk of impairment.
Page 12 of 12ERA14FA417
See 
http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_037.pdf
 for additional 
resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents. Note that this should 
not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations 
(FARs). 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
03/23/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Christopher A Mard; FAA/FSDO; Boston, MA
Kurt Gibson; Continental Motors Inc.; Mobile, AL
Steve Miller; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
03/23/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89994
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
