National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Delray, FL
Accident Number: ANC07LA027
Date & Time: 04/01/2007, 1454 EDT
Registration: N9174D
Aircraft: Carris Avid Aircraft
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot, with one passenger, was conducing a Title 14, CFR Part 91 personal flight in an experimental, homebuilt airplane.
As a result of the accident, the pilot sustained serious injuries, and was unable to recall any details about the accident.
According to rescue personnel that responded to the accident site, the pilot reported a loss of engine power during cruise flight, and the accident happened as he was attempting a forced landing in an open field.
Witnesses reported seeing the accident airplane fly over the open field, followed by a series of descending, spiral turns over the intended landing site.
As the airplane continued the series of turns, it abruptly nosed down, and struck the ground nose first.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.
An FAA airworthiness inspector inspected the airplane wreckage after its recovery.
The inspector said that the right fuel tank contained about 4 gallons of fuel, and the left fuel tank was empty.
He also reported that he did not discover any preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane or the engine.
A factor associated with the accident was the inadvertent stall.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 2.
(C) AIRSPEED(VS) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD Factual Information On April 1, 2007, about 1454 Eastern daylight time, an experimental Carris Avid Flyer, N9174D, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and subsequent forced landing near Delray Beach, Florida.
The private pilot/owner and the one passenger both sustained serious injuries.
The local 14 CFR Part 91 flight operated in visual meteorological conditions.
The flight originated at the Antiquers Aerodrome, a private fly in community, located in Delray Beach, about 1430.
According to rescue personnel that responded to the accident site, the pilot reported a loss of engine power during cruise flight, and the accident happened as he was attempting a forced landing in an open field.
Witnesses reported seeing the accident airplane fly over the open field, followed by a series of descending, spiral turns over the intended landing site.
The witnesses said that as the airplane continued the series of turns, it abruptly nosed down, and struck the ground nose first.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.
The accident airplane was equipped with a Rotax engine, model 582UL.
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, he has no memory of the accident due to retrograde amnesia.
He said that his passenger, who remained conscious following the accident, reported that the engine quit running, and the accident happened while he was attempting a forced landing in an open field.
An FAA airworthiness inspector from the Fort Lauderdale Flight Standards District Office inspected the airplane wreckage after it was recovered from the accident site.
The inspector reported that the right fuel tank contained about 4 gallons of fuel, and the left fuel tank was empty.
He also reported that he did not discover any preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
