National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Los Angeles, CA
Accident Number: LAX07CA120
Date & Time: 04/02/2007, 1729 PDT
Registration: N320
Aircraft: Carpenter Lancair 320
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane collided with a fence during a rejected takeoff following a partial loss of engine power.
The pilot reported that after the airplane lifted off the ground, he retracted the landing gear.
Just abeam the tower, he felt a "jolt/engine burp," and noted that he was about 100 feet above the ground.
He reduced the power, but was not able to lower the landing gear prior to the airplane touching down on the remaining runway.
The airplane slid down the runway, and came to a stop after impacting the airport perimeter fence.
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the engine following the accident and noted that the number 2 fuel injection nozzle was clogged with unidentified debris that would crumble when touched.
Inspection of the number 2 cylinder combustion chamber revealed a white coloration on the cylinder walls consistent with a lean fuel condition.
No anomalies were noted with the remaining fuel injection nozzles and the other cylinders' combustion chambers.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: contamination of the number 2 fuel injector nozzle that lead to a partial loss of engine power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,NOZZLE - OBSTRUCTED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF Findings 2.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
