According to a FAA aviation safety inspector, witnesses observed the airplane flying 'low' over 
Lake Roosevelt. The witnesses observed the left wing strike the surface of  the lake.  The 
airplane then broke apart and sank in about 40 feet of water.  The witnesses stated that there 
was no smoke or fire coming from the airplane at the time of the accident, and that there were 
no perceived problems with the engine.  FAA inspectors found no evidence of bird strikes, nor 
of mechanical deficiencies prior to impact.  Toxicological testing revealed that a high level of 
ethanol was detected in bodily fluids. 
The pilot's failure to maintain terrain clearance while maneuvering.  Factors include the 
physiological impairment of the pilot's judgement due to alcohol. 
 On December 1, 1997, about 1445 Pacific standard time, N1054J, an Aero Commander 112 
airplane, operated by the owner/pilot, collided with water while maneuvering and was 
destroyed near Kettle Falls, Washington.  The private pilot and his two passengers were fatally 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.  The 
personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR 91.  The flight departed from Colville, Washington, 
about 1430 and was en route to Kent, Washington.  
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector from Spokane, 
Washington, witnesses observed the airplane flying "low" over Lake Roosevelt.  The lake is 
formed by the Columbia River near a dam, and is located about 10 miles northwest of the 
departure airport.  The witnesses observed the left wing strike the surface of the lake.  The 
airplane then broke apart and sank in about 40 feet of water.  The witnesses stated that there 
was no smoke or fire coming from the airplane at the time of the accident, and that there were 
no perceived problems with the engine.  FAA inspectors found no evidence of bird strikes, nor 
mechanical deficiencies prior to impact.  The ELT was found to have its switch in the off 
position.  
Toxicological testing revealed that ethanol was detected in bodily fluids.  An autopsy was 
performed by Dr. George R. Lindholm at Holy Family Hospital, Spokane, Washington.
