The aircraft was being repositioned to home base following a partial repaint.  While on short 
final to land the engine lost power and the aircraft landed in a residential area.  Postaccident 
examination of the fuel and ignition systems found the fuel flow transducer to be restricted.  
After several attempts it was possible to blow air through it, but with resistance.  Nothing 
foreign was found in the lines or blown from the transducer.  The component was sent to the 
manufacturer of the fuel system and met flow specifications.  The component was then sent to 
a testing laboratory for examination where it was opened and examined.  The interior, turbine, 
and bearing points appeared to be normal and functional. 
Blockage of the fuel flow transducer, which resulted in fuel starvation and the loss of engine 
power.  Unsuitable terrain for an emergency landing was a contributing factor. 
 On December 2, 1997, at 1435 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna T210N, N1396U, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing at Union City, California.  The aircraft was 
cleared for a straight-in approach to runway 28R at Hayward Air Terminal.  At 4.5 miles from 
the runway, the pilot declared an emergency and landed in a residential area.  The pilot 
received minor injuries.  The aircraft departed Salinas, California, on a repositioning flight 
following a partial repaint of the aircraft.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. 
On December 4, 1998, a postaccident examination of the aircraft and engine was conducted at 
Hayward, California.  Present at the examination were four representatives from the Federal 
Aviation Administration Oakland Flight Standards District Office, Teledyne Continental 
Motors, and representatives from the operator of the aircraft.
According to maintenance information dated June 1997, a low fuel flow indication report was 
resolved by flushing fuel through the transducer.  Another component of the system was also 
cleaned and the procedure resolved the condition.
The fuel and ignition systems were examined.  Initial attempts to blow through the fuel flow 
transducer were unsuccessful due to a blockage.  Subsequently, after several attempts it was 
possible to blow through the transducer, although it was with a degree of resistance according 
to the Continental representative. 
On March 25, 1998, the transducer was functional tested at Shadin Company Incorporated, 
Louis Park, Minnesota, the manufacturer of the system.  According to Shadin, the transducer 
met the system fuel flow specifications at the time of the test.
On May 7, 1998, the transducer was taken to Fowler Inc. for internal examination.  Attempts to 
visually examine the interior by borescope were not possible.  The transducer cavity 
closure/assembly is accomplished with an epoxy.  It is not designed to be opened after 
manufacture.  According to the manufacturer of this component of the system, FloScan, the 
only way to open it is to cut it open or pressurize it apart with nitrogen or hydraulics.
The transducer was taken to Tap-Ex Company for an electric metal disentagrator procedure.  
The procedure allowed access to the transducer turbine cavity without damage to the turbine. 
The turbine wheel, cavity, and bearing points appeared to be normal and functional.     
The manufacturer of the transducer component of the system (FloScan) chose not to be 
involved in the testing/examination.
