National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BLAKESBURG, IA
Accident Number: CHI00LA281
Date & Time: 09/01/2000, 1600 CDT
Registration: N82748
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported he was preparing to land on runway 36 (2,200 feet by 150 feet, dry grass) when another airplane on the ground had its engine quit.
This airplane was stopped on the east edge of the 150-foot wide airstrip, approximately 1,200 feet from the approach end of the runway.
The pilot attempted to go around, but did not add full power.
He reported the airplane stalled and the left wing dropped.
The pilot reported that he added full power, however, the airplane impacted the terrain off the west wide of the airstrip.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to add full power during a go around which resulted in descreased airspeed and a subsequent stall.
A factor associated with the accident was the airplane stopped on the edge of the airstrip.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - AIRCRAFT PARKED/STANDING 2.
(C) THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
The private pilot was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions and no flight plan was filed.
The flight last departed Mount Pleasant, Iowa, at 1500 central daylight time.
The pilot reported he was preparing to land on runway 36 (2,200 feet by 150 feet, dry grass) when another airplane on the ground had its engine quit.
This airplane was stopped on the east edge of the airstrip, approximately 1,200 feet from the approach end of the runway.
The pilot reported that he "attempted a go around but did not give it full throttle."
He reported the airplane stalled and the left wing dropped.
The pilot reported that he added full power, however, the airplane impacted the terrain off the west wide of the airstrip.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 44, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
