National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MARION, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA297
Date & Time: 09/01/2000, 1830 EST
Registration: N3383A
Aircraft: Piper PA-22/20
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported, "Upon landing, a severe rotary thermal (dust devil?)
impacted plane on right rear tail surfaces and propelled aircraft sideways in turf by skidding to the right."
Structural damage resulted to the wing and landing gear.
The pilot reported there were no mechanical problems with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot failed to maintain directional control during landing.
A factor was the dust devil.
Findings Occurrence #1: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - DUST DEVIL/WHIRLWIND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On September 1, 2000, at 1830 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-22/20, N3383A, was substantially damaged when it skidded sideways during landing on runway 4 (5,200 X 100 feet) at the Marion Municipal Airport (MZZ), Marion, Indiana.
The private pilot was not injured.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight had departed Drake Field Airport, near Fayetteville, Arkansas, at 1000, en route to MZZ.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported, "Upon landing, a severe rotary thermal (dust devil?)
impacted plane on right rear tail surfaces and propelled aircraft sideways in turf by skidding to the right."
Structural damaged resulted to the wing and landing gear.
The pilot reported there were no mechanical problems with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 64, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
