National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOT SPRINGS, AR
Accident Number: FTW00LA247
Date & Time: 09/01/2000, 1538 CDT
Registration: N83866
Aircraft: Aeronca BL7-AC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis About 20 minutes into the cross-country flight, the pilot observed several lightning strikes ahead of his flight path.
He turned 180 degrees to return to his departure point, and after about 5 minutes, he observed a storm developing in his flight path.
He then decided to fly south toward the closest airport.
Upon reaching the airport, he determined the winds to be light and variable out of the west.
On final approach, just before touchdown on runway 23, 'wind started to buffet the aircraft.'
Full aileron deflection was used to keep the right wing down after touchdown.
The airplane then drifted off the runway and into the grass.
As this was occurring, the pilot started to apply 'a little power' to gain more rudder control when 'a large gust of wind hit the aircraft causing the right wing to [go] completely over, striking the surface.'
Subsequently, the airplane nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the right wing spar, both wing struts, and the rudder.
The wind, 16 minutes after the accident, was from 260 degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 26 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain control during landing.
A factor was the wind gusts.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 flight.
The cross-country flight had last departed Conway Field, Conway, Arkansas, at 1445.
The pilot reported on NTSB Form 6120.1/2, that he had departed Conway to continue on his planned cross-country flight.
He reported the visibility to be about 3-5 miles in "hazy" conditions.
About 20 minutes into the flight, he observed several lightning strikes ahead and to the north of his position.
He immediately turned 180 degrees to return to Conway, and after flying about 5 minutes, it appeared that a storm was developing to the north in his flight path toward Conway.
He then decided to fly south toward Hot Springs, which was the closest airport, to sit and wait out the weather.
Upon reaching Hot Springs, he made one pass over midfield to check the windsock.
The winds appeared to be light and variable out of the west, so he entered a downwind for Runway 23.
On final approach, just before touchdown, "wind started to buffet the aircraft."
The pilot had to utilize full aileron deflection to keep the right wing down after touchdown.
The airplane then started to drift off the runway and into the grass.
As this was occurring, the pilot started to apply "a little power" to gain more rudder control when "a large gust of wind hit the aircraft causing the right wing to [go] completely over, striking the surface."
Subsequently, the airplane nosed over and came to rest "upside down."
Examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector revealed damage to the right wing spar, both wing struts, and the rudder.
The windsock at Hot Springs was found to be serviceable.
The wind, reported by Hot Springs 16 minutes after the accident, was from 260 degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 26 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
