National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SELLERSBURG, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA293
Date & Time: 09/01/2000, 1830 EDT
Registration: N1334T
Aircraft: Piper PA28R-200
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage during a wheels up landing.
The pilot stated, "On the downwind leg gear failed to come down during prelanding checklist.
Attempted to recycle the gear down lever, with same results."
A FAA on-scene examination revealed that the landing gear powerpack's electric motor was defective.
The examination further revealed that during the last annual, a kit to delete the automatic extension features of the landing gear system was incorrectly installed.
As installed, the kit would not allow an emergency extension of the landing gear.
A FAA inspector stated, "Instructions allowed that once the kit was installed to perform a landing gear retract check to ensure that the operations of the landing gear was satisfactory.
[The airplane operator] failed to perform this portion of the operation."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the improper servicing of the emergency extension assembly and the gear extension not verified by company maintenance personnel.
Factors were the failure of the hydraulic system's motor, normal and emergency gear extension not available to the pilot, and the wheels up landing performed by the pilot.
Findings Occurrence #1: WHEELS UP LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM,MOTOR - FAILURE 2.
(F) GEAR EXTENSION - UNAVAILABLE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) LANDING GEAR,EMERGENCY EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - IMPROPERLY SERVICED 4.
(C) GEAR EXTENSION - NOT VERIFIED - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 5.
The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
No flight plan was on file.
The pilot was uninjured.
The local flight departed from JVY at 1600.
The pilot stated, "On the downwind leg gear failed to come down during prelanding checklist.
Attempted to recycle the gear down lever, with same results."
He said, "[An employee] of [the airplane operator] contacted me via UNICOM and we discussed options.
After moving to another common freq.
(122.95), [the employee] suggested other alternatives such as slow flight with flaps extended to full, wigging the A/C, pull the circuit breaker to see if the hydraulic pressure would bleed off and the gear come down on its own in addition to the emergency checklist alternatives.
This all occurred over a period of about 2 hours.
At the end of attempting these alternatives, it was decided to gear up land on runway 18.
Neither winds nor weather was a factor."
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors performed an on-scene examination of the airplane.
The examination revealed that the landing gear powerpack's electric motor was defective.
The examination further revealed that during the last annual, a kit to delete the automatic extension features of the landing gear system was incorrectly installed.
As installed, the kit would not allow an emergency extension of the landing gear.
A FAA inspector stated, "Instructions allowed that once the kit was installed to perform a landing gear retract check to ensure that the operations of the landing gear was satisfactory.
[The airplane operator] failed to perform this portion of the operation."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 2650 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 33 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 5576 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-360-C1C Registered Owner: AIRCRAFT SPECIALISTS INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
