National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CARMEL, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA279
Date & Time: 09/01/2000, 0815 EST
Registration: N1156L
Aircraft: Mockler ZODIAC CH-600
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The accident airplane was destroyed during an in-flight impact with a tower and with terrain.
A witness said, 'I watched the plane fly from North to South over my house.
The plane was very low about 250 - 300ft.
The engine sounded good and the plane was flying level and not loosing altitude.
It appeared under control.'
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector said, 'Due to the extensive damage to the forward structure, some cable attachments were broken, but it appeared that all controls were in operation at the time of the accident.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot not maintaining altitude/clearance from the tower.
A factor was the tower.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - TOWER 2.
The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
No flight plan was on file.
The pilot was fatally injured.
The local flight originated from Anderson Municipal Darlington Field, near Anderson, Indiana, about 0800.
A witness said, "I watched the plane fly from North to South over my house.
The plane was very low about 250 - 300ft.
The engine sounded good and the plane was flying level and not loosing altitude.
It appeared under control.
I lost visual as he passed south in a tree line."
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors performed an on-scene examination of the wreckage.
A FAA inspector stated that the airplane's right wing impacted a radio tower about 160 feet above ground level, that the impacted tower was about 192 feet high, and that the airplane came to rest inverted about 421 feet from the impacted tower.
Another FAA inspector said, "Due to the extensive damage to the forward structure, some cable attachments were broken, but it appeared that all controls were in operation at the time of the accident."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 76, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
