National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NICKERSON, KS
Accident Number: CHI00LA289
Date & Time: 09/01/2000, 1600 CDT
Registration: N9326R
Aircraft: Cessna A188B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis During initial climb after takeoff the aerial application aircraft, loaded with 165-gallons of chemical, impacted a hay bale located off the end of the runway.
The pilot maneuvered the aircraft back for a landing and during the landing the right main landing gear collapsed, the right wing impacted the terrain, and the aircraft skidded to a stop.
Witnesses to the accident saw the aircraft impact a hay bale, located off the end of the runway used for the takeoff run, severing the right main landing gear.
The pilot reported that the accident could have been prevented by, "I could have carried a smaller load or simply not flown when the density altitude gets too high.
Also could have checked the adjacent fields for temporary obstructions (in this case some hay bales) that may have been placed there."
The density altitude was approximated at 4,780-mean sea level.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: altidude/clearance not obtained/maintained by the pilot.
Factors to the accident were the hay bale, the inadequate preflight planning/preparation by the pilot, the high-density altitude, and the high weight of the aircraft at the time of the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - OTHER 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE 4.
(F) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - HIGH 5.
(F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 6.
Visual metrological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The aerial application flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137 and was not on a flight plan.
The pilot, the sole occupant, sustained no injuries.
The flight was departing for the local aerial application flight at the time of the accident.
According the pilot's written statement, he was departing for an aerial application flight when on takeoff the aircraft impacted a hay bale located at the end of the runway.
The pilot stated, "The acceleration during the take-off roll seemed lower than normal, this was expected given the heavy load [165-gallons of herbicide solution] and high density altitude [approximated at 4,780-mean sea level]."
The pilot reported, "The aircraft became airborne just prior to reaching the end of the runway, but the airspeed was still well below Vy [best rate of climb airspeed].
I attempted to accelerate in 'ground effect' to Vy [best rate of climb airspeed], but the aircraft did not accelerate, so I decided to dump some of the load."
The pilot stated that while he was dumping some of the chemical load, the aircraft "...bounce off the alfalfa field at least once and perhaps several times."
The pilot reported that after releasing most of the chemical load, the aircraft was able to establish a normal climb attitude and speed.
The pilot stated that he maneuvered the aircraft back for a landing and during the landing the right main landing gear collapsed, the right wing impacted the terrain, and the aircraft skidded to a stop.
The pilot reported that witnesses to the accident saw the aircraft impact a hay bale, located off the end of the runway used for the takeoff run, severing the right main landing gear.
The pilot reported that the accident could have been prevented by, "I could have carried a smaller load or simply not flown when the density altitude gets too high.
Also could have checked the adjacent fields for temporary obstructions (in this case some hay bales) that may have been placed there."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
