Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Trenton, SC
Accident Number:
ERA14LA059
Date & Time:
12/02/2013, 1530 EST 
Registration:
N355PT
Aircraft:
MOFFITT OSCAR/ KIT PROSTAR A/C 
PT2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the pilot, he was conducting a presale inspection of his experimental, amateur-
built airplane. He ensured no debris was present in the gascolator and then conducted a test 
flight. During the test flight and while on final approach to land, the engine lost all power, and 
the pilot subsequently made a forced landing in a field. A postaccident examination of the 
gascolator revealed that the strainer bowl was not installed and safety wired in accordance with 
a service letter issued by the gascolator manufacturer. As a result, the gascolator strainer bowl 
became separated from the bail, which caused fuel starvation to the engine and total loss of 
engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The airplane owner/pilot ‚s failure to follow the gascolator manufacturer™s recommendations 
for installing and safety wiring the gascolator strainer bowl, which resulted in the bowl 
separating and a total loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel filter-strainer - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Preflight inspection - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA14LA059
Factual Information
On December 2, 2013, about 1530 eastern standard time, an experimental, amateur-built, 
Prostar PT2, N355PT, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain during a forced 
landing near Edgefield County Airport,Trenton, South Carolina. The private pilot sustained 
minor injuries. The airplane was registered to and operated by the private pilot under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The flight departed from Twin 
Lakes Airport (S17), Graniteville, South Carolina at 1500.
According to the pilot, he was conducting an inspection of his airplane in preparation of selling 
it. During the inspection he noted that the main fuel tank lines were old and brittle. He 
replaced the main fuel tank lines and drained the fuel system. While draining the fuel system, 
he discovered debris within the gasculator. He continued to drain the fuel system until debris 
was no longer present within the gasculator.  He then checked the system for leaks. No leaks 
were noted and the pilot conducted a test flight. During the test flight, while on final approach 
to land, the engine lost all power and the pilot conducted a forced landing in a field. During the 
descent the airplane struck a tree before coming to rest at the base of the tree.
A post-accident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector revealed damage to both wings and the airframe. An examination of the engine 
conducted and valve train continuity and compression were observed on all cylinders. Further 
examination revealed that there was a hole in the number 1 cylinder valve cover. The cowling 
was against the valve cover and the screws were punctured through the valve cover.  
Examination of the ignition system revealed that the magnetos and leads were all intact. Due to 
external damage to the engine an engine run was not performed.
Examination of the intake system revealed no blockage in the air box or carburetor venturi. 
The carburetor drain plug was removed and no fuel was observed in the carburetor. The fuel 
selector was moved to the "on" position to take a fuel sample from the gasculator and fuel was 
noted running freely from the gasculator . The fuel inlet line at the carburetor was removed; air 
was blown through it and no blockage was noted. Further examination of the gascolator 
revealed that between the thumb wheel and the gascolator bowl there was supposed to be an 
inverted bell that applied pressure to the bottom of the bowl; it was missing. There was no 
observable impact damage to the gascolator. The gascolator also contained a handmade gasket 
made from a cork material and there was no safety wire on the gascolator. The pilot stated to 
the FAA inspector that he believed that the gascolator was salvaged from a PA-28 airplane 
when his airplane was built. He went on to say that the gascolator always seemed to be loose, 
but the thumb wheel would not turn any more to tighten it further. Oil and dirt residue were 
found throughout the cowling. In the area were the gascolator was mounted the oil and dirt 
residue was gone and the cowling appeared clean.
The gascolator was consistent with a Piper part number 63839-03 gascolator. A review of the 
Piper Service Letter 1141, dated April 11, 2011 was performed. The service letter called out a 
new procedure for safety wiring the bail assembly on the gascolator. The gasket that Piper 
required for this gascolator was made from rubber.
Page 3 of 5ERA14LA059
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft inspection event
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
65
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/28/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2013
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 283.3 hours (Total, all aircraft), 11.5 hours (Total, this make and model), 208.4 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 16.8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8.2 hours (Last 30 
days, all aircraft), 0.4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MOFFITT OSCAR/ KIT 
PROSTAR A/C
Registration:
N355PT
Model/Series:
PT2 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1072
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/10/2013, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
515 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
4106-27
Registered Owner:
PUTT LARRY F
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
PUTT LARRY F
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ERA14LA059
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DNL, 422 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
34°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.89 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
GRANITEVILLE, SC (S17)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Trenton, SC (6J6)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1506 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Edgefield County Airport (6J6)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
611 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.736944, -81.818611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric Alleyne
Adopted Date:
10/19/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Cornelius J Baker; FAA/FSDO; West Columbia, SC
Publish Date:
10/19/2015
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88502
Page 5 of 5ERA14LA059
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
