Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Alexander City, AL
Accident Number:
ERA13LA045
Date & Time:
11/01/2012, 1546 CDT 
Registration:
N231TM
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY 
R22
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After departure, the helicopter began to vibrate at an altitude of about 300 feet above ground 
level (agl). The pilot chose to return to the airport to perform a precautionary landing. The 
pilot initiated an autorotation about 100 feet agl at an airspeed of between 45 to 50 knots but 
could not control the helicopter. The pilot applied aft cyclic to flare the helicopter; however, it 
did not lose airspeed. The low rotor rpm aural warning activated during the maneuver, and the 
helicopter subsequently landed hard and rolled over on its right side. Postaccident 
examinations of the engine and airframe did not reveal any anomalies that would have caused 
the vibration the helicopter experienced after takeoff. If the pilot had initiated the autorotation 
sooner, she may have had adequate airspeed to establish the glide and a sufficient amount of 
rotor rpm to cushion the landing and retain positive control of the helicopter. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s delayed decision to initiate an autorotation and her subsequent improper conduct of 
the autorotation, which resulted in a hard landing, after the helicopter started vibrating for 
reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examinations revealed no 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
Findings
Aircraft
Landing flare - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Delayed action - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6ERA13LA045
Factual Information
On November 1, 2012, at 1546 central daylight time, a Robinson R22, N231TM, sustained 
substantial damage during a precautionary landing at Thomas C. Russell Field Airport (ALX), 
Alexander City, Alabama. The commercial pilot was seriously injured, and the commercial 
pilot-rated passenger received minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
no flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which was conducted under the provisions of 
Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The flight was originating at the time of the 
accident.
According to the pilot, she and her co-worker were en route to Sarasota, Florida and were 
departing ALX after stopping for lunch. The pilot rated passenger was conducting the takeoff 
when, shortly after departure while turning crosswind, the helicopter started to shake. The 
pilot assumed control of the helicopter and elected to return to the airport to perform a 
precautionary landing in the grass. The pilot did not observe any abnormal indications on the 
flight instruments, but stated that she did not look at the manifold pressure gauge. 
About 100 feet above ground level and approximately 45 to 50 knots, the pilot initiated an 
autorotation, but "could not control" the helicopter. She then reduced the collective pitch and 
applied forward pressure on the cyclic control to gain airspeed for landing. As the helicopter 
approached the landing site, the pilot applied aft cyclic to flare the helicopter. The low rotor 
rpm horn activated, and the helicopter impacted the ground and came to rest on its right side, 
resulting in substantial damage to the main rotor blades and fuselage. 
The pilot-rated passenger stated that, about one minute after takeoff at an altitude of 300 feet, 
the flight controls began to "vibrate." The pilot assumed control of the helicopter, and the 
passenger declared an emergency over the radio. The passenger reported that the pilot 
"appeared to have difficulty" controlling the helicopter during the return to the airport, and 
"may have" entered an autorotation. He stated that the helicopter did not lose airspeed and did 
not appear to flare prior to impact, contacting the ground at an airspeed of 40 to 50 knots with 
the low rotor rpm horn activated. The helicopter rolled to its right side after impact, and the 
pilots egressed. 
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate and flight instructor certificate with a rating for 
rotorcraft-helicopter. Her most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second-class 
medical certificate was issued on May 21, 2012. At the time of the accident, the pilot reported 
1,165 total hours of flight experience, all of which were in the accident helicopter make and 
model. 
The 1555 automated weather observation at ALX included winds from 300 degrees at 7 knots 
with gusts to 14 knots; 10 statute miles visibility; sky clear; temperature 21 degrees Celsius (C); 
dew point -4 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.97 inches of mercury.
According to FAA airworthiness records, the helicopter was manufactured in 1993 and was 
equipped with a Lycoming O-320-B2C, 160-hp, reciprocating engine and float-type landing 
gear. Review of the helicopter's maintenance records revealed that its most recent annual 
inspection was completed on September 14, 2012, at a total airframe time of 1684.2 hours, and 
a time since engine overhaul of 531.6 hours. Records also indicated that the governor had been 
replaced on October 31, 2012.
The main wreckage came to rest east of the runway prior to the threshold of runway 18, 
Page 3 of 6ERA13LA045
oriented on a heading of about 180 degrees magnetic. 
A postaccident examination conducted by an FAA inspector revealed impact damage to the 
flight control tubes and rods. Flight control continuity was established from the cockpit area to 
the main rotor and to the tail rotor gearbox. The main rotor driveshaft and mast were 
separated from the gearbox and located near the main wreckage. The swashplate system 
displayed minor impact damage.. One main rotor blade was separated at the hub, exhibited 
significant impact damage and was located approximately 500 feet away from the main 
wreckage. The other blade remained attached to the hub and also exhibited impact damage. No 
foreign objects or debris were observed in the vicinity of the engine cooling fan, and the fan 
remained on its shaft. The V-belts and alternator belt were examined and found to be intact. 
The strap connecting the floats to the skids remained attached.
A postaccident examination of the engine by an overhaul facility revealed normal wear of the 
engine components, including the crankshaft, camshaft, lifters, rods, gears, cylinders and 
crankcase. Bench testing of the magnetos revealed no anomalies, and examination of the 
carburetor revealed no evidence of fuel contamination. 
Examination of the main rotor blades was conducted by the NTSB materials laboratory and 
revealed no evidence of corrosion, leading edge paint erosion, or debonding between the blade 
spar and skin. Examination of the fracture surfaces revealed signatures consistent with 
separation due to overstress.
The manufacturer's pilots operating handbook (POH) stated that autorotations should be 
conducted at an airspeed between 60-70 knots while maintaining rotor rpm within the green 
arc. The POH further cautioned, "The R22 has a light, low-inertia rotor system. Most of the 
energy required for an autorotation is stored in the forward momentum of the aircraft, not in 
the rotor. Therefore, a well-timed cyclic flare is required and rotor rpm must be kept in the 
green until just before ground contact."
History of Flight
Initial climb
Unknown or undetermined
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Autorotation
Hard landing (Defining event)
Page 4 of 6ERA13LA045
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
39
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/21/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/29/2012
Flight Time:
1165 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1165 hours (Total, this make and model), 994 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 163 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 17 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 9 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Other Flight Crew Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
28
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/02/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/15/2012
Flight Time:
300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 270 hours (Total, this make and model), 200 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 80 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA13LA045
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER 
COMPANY
Registration:
N231TM
Model/Series:
R22 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2317M
Landing Gear Type: 
Float; Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/14/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1370 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
788 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-B2C
Registered Owner:
CASABLANCA HELICOPTER 
LLC
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
Helicopter Academy
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ALX, 686 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1555 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 14 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / -4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Alexander City, AL (ALX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Dawson, GA (K16J)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1543 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Thomas C. Russel Field Airport 
(ALX)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
686 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6ERA13LA045
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
32.908889, -85.957778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jose Obregon
Adopted Date:
04/23/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Warren Green; FAA/FSDO; Vestavia Hills, AL
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA
Publish Date:
04/23/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85492
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
