Page 1 of 4
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Winston, OR
Accident Number:
SEA01LA164
Date & Time:
09/01/2001, 1830 PDT 
Registration:
N95223
Aircraft:
Taylorcraft BC12-D
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he was repositioning the aircraft from one field to the next in order for 
the aircraft to be closer to his residence for "major rework."  The aircraft had not undergone an 
annual inspection for about three years.  The pilot reported that the short field takeoff was to 
the north.  The aircraft lifted off and attained an altitude of about 10 feet, about 150 feet before 
the fence line, when the aircraft started to steadily loose altitude.  The aircraft's main landing 
gear caught on the fence.  The aircraft continued airborne over the next field, but "mushed" 
along.  The aircraft subsequently collided with another fence on the north end of the field, 
collapsing the main landing gear and damaging the wings.  The pilot reported no mechanical 
failures or malfunctions with the aircraft at the time.  The wind was reported as "swirling" by 
the pilot and a light breeze from the south from two witnesses.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from a fence during the initial takeoff.  A fence was a 
factor.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) OBJECT - FENCE
2. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 4SEA01LA164
Factual Information
On September 1, 2001, about 1830 Pacific daylight time, a Taylorcraft BC12-D, N95223, 
registered to a private owner and operated by the pilot as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, 
collided with a fence during takeoff from an open pasture located about seven miles southwest 
of Winston, OR.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was 
filed.  The aircraft was substantially damaged and the private pilot, the sole occupant, received 
minor injuries.
During a telephone interview with the NTSB IIC, and subsequent statements to the Federal 
Aviation Administration inspector from the Portland, Oregon, Flight Standards District Office, 
the pilot reported that the flight began from Roseburg, Oregon, and was flown to a farm near 
Winston.  The pilot reported that the aircraft had not undergone an annual inspection for 
about three years and he was repositioning the aircraft to this area so that "major rework" 
could be accomplished.   The pilot over flew the farm several times to determine the wind 
direction then proceeded to land.  While on the ground, the pilot noted that the wind was 
"swirling," but appeared to be blowing from the north to southwest.   In order for the aircraft to 
be closer to his residence, the pilot got back in the aircraft to move it to another field.  The pilot 
stated that he applied full throttle with the brakes on in preparation for a short field takeoff to 
the north.  The pilot thought that the aircraft attained an altitude of about ten feet, about 150 
feet before the fence line, when the aircraft started to steadily loose altitude.  One of the main 
landing gear wheels caught on the fence.  The aircraft continued flying but "mushed" along 
before colliding with another fence on the north end of the field, substantially damaging both 
wings and collapsing the landing gear.  The pilot reported no mechanical failures or 
malfunctions with the aircraft at the time of the accident.
Two witnesses reported that the aircraft pulled up just before colliding with the three to four 
foot high fence.  The aircraft continued on over the next field, subsequently colliding with the 
fence on the north end of the field.  One witness reported that the takeoff was "going with the 
wind," while the other reported that the breeze was light from the south.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
 Expired
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
338 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 3 of 4SEA01LA164
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Taylorcraft
Registration:
N95223
Model/Series:
BC12-D 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
9623
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/03/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
A-65-8
Registered Owner:
Keith A. Graham
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
Calvin W. Graham
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Winston, OR 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Winston, WA 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 4 of 4
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Debra J Eckrote
Adopted Date:
02/20/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert J Bilak; FAA-FSDO; Hillsboro, OR
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
