National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ogden, UT
Accident Number: DEN05LA019
Date & Time: 11/02/2004, 1655 MST
Registration: N7852P
Aircraft: Piper PA-24-250
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot reported engine problems while on approach to the airport.
During the forced landing, the airplane impacted a berm, and tall brush, causing substantial damage.
A postaccident examination of the engine on the day of the accident revealed that the air box around the carburetor contained a small amount of water.
The routine weather report taken at 1653 reported the temperature as 42 degrees Fahrenheit (F) and the dewpoint as 25 degrees F. According to the carburetor icing chart, conditions were conducive for icing at glide and cruise power.
In addition, several other pilots flying in the area at the time of the accident reported experiencing carburetor icing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the loss of engine power due to carburetor icing.
Contributing factors include the weather conditions conducive for carburetor icing, and a lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - BERM Factual Information On November 2, 2004, at approximately 1655 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-24-250, N7852P, operated by KW Aviation, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during a forced landing 3 miles north of Ogden-Hinckley Airport, Ogden, Utah.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The training flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The commercial certificated pilot and flight instructor sustained serious injuries.
The local flight originated at approximately 1530.
According to the FAA inspector who traveled to the scene, the pilot reported engine problems while on approach for landing to the Ogden airport.
During the forced landing, the airplane impacted a berm, and tall brush, separating the empennage.
The right main landing gear penetrated the right wing and the outboard 2 feet of the left wing was crushed and bent up.
Both pilots sustained head injuries and neither are able to remember the events leading up to the accident.
A postaccident examination of the engine on the day of the accident, conducted by the FAA, revealed that the air box around the carburetor contained a small amount of water.
Further inspection of the engine and remaining airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
The Ogden routine weather report taken at 1653 reported the temperature as 42 degrees Fahrenheit (F) and the dewpoint as 25 degrees F. According to the carburetor icing chart, conditions were conducive for icing at glide and cruise power.
The FAA inspector stated that several other pilots flying in the area at the time of the accident reported experiencing carburetor icing as well.
Flight Instructor Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 25, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
