Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Atlantic City, NJ
Accident Number:
ERA14LA141
Date & Time:
03/04/2014, 1650 EST 
Registration:
N1449H
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot said that, before departure, he cleared ﬁminor snow accumulationﬂ from the bottom 
of the engine compartment. The pilot performed the preflight inspection, engine start, taxi, 
run-up, and before takeoff checks in accordance with the applicable checklists. The engine 
accelerated normally during the takeoff roll with a ﬁslight hesitationﬂ at 2,200 to 2,300 rpm as 
the takeoff continued. When the airplane was at 70 knots and over the departure end of the 
runway, the engine experienced a partial loss of power. Rather than attempt to return to the 
runway or land straight ahead to wooded terrain, the pilot chose to perform a forced landing to 
the airport perimeter road. The airplane™s left wing struck a tree and a fence and then 
separated from the airplane, and the airplane then impacted the road and came to rest 
inverted. Examination of the airplane revealed no preimpact mechanical anomalies, and, 
during a test run, the engine started immediately, accelerated smoothly, and ran without 
interruption through several rpm changes. The magnetos were tested and functioned as 
designed. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power at takeoff for reasons that could not be determined during a 
postaccident examination or engine test run.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA14LA141
Factual Information
On March 4, 2014, at 1650 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N1449H, operated by the 
FAA Flying Club, INC, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain and a fence 
during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power after takeoff from Atlantic City 
International Airport (ACY), Atlantic City, New Jersey. The airline transport pilot received 
minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, and no flight plan was filed 
for the personal flight, which was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. 
In a written statement, the pilot stated the purpose of the flight was to travel in order to give a 
presentation on cold weather survival and civilian air intercept procedures. He said he 
specifically checked to see if the airplane was "clear of snow and ice" prior to departure, and 
determined that it was, but then later described clearing the "minor snow accumulation" at the 
bottom of the engine compartment. The pilot described his preflight inspection, engine start, 
taxi, run-up, and before takeoff checks as performed in accordance with the checklist. 
He then described a "normal" acceleration of the engine during the takeoff roll, with a "slight 
hesitation" at 2,200-2,300 rpm, as he continued the takeoff. At 70 knots and over the 
departure end of the runway, the engine "lost significant power." Rather than attempt a return 
to the runway, or land straight ahead to wooded terrain, the pilot elected to perform a forced 
landing to the airport perimeter road. Just prior to ground contact, the airplane's left wing 
struck a tree and a fence, and the airplane impacted the road and came to rest inverted.
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land and 
instrument airplane. He also held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for 
rotorcraft-helicopter. His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class 
medical certificate was issued on October 21, 2013. He reported 3,245 total hours of flight 
experience, of which 318 hours were in single-engine airplanes.
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1977. Its most recent annual 
inspection was completed September 12, 2013, at 5,038.1 aircraft hours. The airplane accrued 
37.1 hours of flight time after the inspection.
At 1654, the weather conditions reported at ACY included calm winds, clear skies, and 10 miles 
of visibility. The temperature was -4 degrees C, the dew point was -9 degrees C, and the 
altimeter setting was 30.28 inches of mercury.
Examination of photographs revealed the airplane came to rest inverted on the airport 
perimeter road, entangled in a fence. The left wing was separated from the airplane at the wing 
root. Photographs taken at the original point of touchdown, revealed slash and paint transfer 
marks in the pavement that were consistent with the color and dimension of the propeller 
blades. The airplane was removed from the site, and recovered to the operator's ramp space at 
ACY. Later, it was moved to an aircraft recovery facility in Clayton, Delaware for a detailed 
inspection which was performed by the FAA on May 14, 2014. 
The airplane was secured to a flatbed trailer, with the left wing separated by impact, and the 
right wing removed by recovery personnel. A substitute propeller and aircraft battery were 
installed, and an auxiliary fuel supply was plumbed into the fuel system to attempt an engine 
run.
Page 3 of 5ERA14LA141
The engine started immediately, accelerated smoothly, and ran without interruption. The 
magnetos were tested, and found to be functioning as designed. Several rpm changes, through 
rapid accelerations and decelerations, were accomplished with smooth operation throughout.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
36
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/19/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3245 hours (Total, all aircraft), 46 hours (Total, this make and model), 2200 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N1449H
Model/Series:
PA-28-161 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7716025
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/12/2013, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
37 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5038 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
FAA FLYING CLUB INC
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
FAA FLYING CLUB INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ERA14LA141
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ACY, 75 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1654 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
130°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.28 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-4°C / -9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Atlantic City, NJ (ACY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
PHILADELPHIA, PA (PNE)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1650 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
ATLANTIC CITY INTL (ACY)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
74 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
13
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
10000 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
39.457500, -74.577222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
04/27/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
04/27/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88874
Page 5 of 5ERA14LA141
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
