Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Stevens Point, WI
Accident Number:
CEN14FA266
Date & Time:
06/01/2014, 1222 CDT 
Registration:
N176FD
Aircraft:
YAKOVLEV YAK-55M
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Air Race/Show
Analysis 
The pilot was performing an aerobatic flight at an airshow event when the accident occurred. 
The flight team manager witnessed the accident and reported that the airplane entered an 
intentional inverted flat spin at the apex of an inside loop maneuver. The airplane completed 
more than 3 rotations in the inverted flat spin before recovering into a dive. The team manager 
then saw the airplane pitch up and enter an "aggressive" left turn. A review of ground-based 
video footage confirmed the sequence of events reported by the team manager and showed 
that, after the pitch up and left roll, the airplane entered a nose-low, descending left spiral that 
continued to ground impact. The observed flight path was consistent with an accelerated 
aerodynamic stall after the pilot had recovered from the inverted spin at a low altitude. The 
airplane cockpit was equipped with an aft-facing video camera that captured the pilot and his 
flight control movements. A review of the available cockpit footage confirmed that the pilot 
remained conscious throughout the accident flight and that the ailerons, elevator, and engine 
had responded to his control inputs. Although the rudder was obstructed from view in the 
video by the pilot's helmeted head, his observed leg movements were consistent with expected 
rudder inputs throughout the flight. Further, a postaccident examination of the airplane did 
not reveal any mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control during the aerobatic flight, which resulted in the 
airplane exceeding its critical angle of attack and entering an accelerated stall at a low altitude.
Page 2 of 10CEN14FA266
Findings
Aircraft
Angle of attack - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 10CEN14FA266
Factual Information
History of Flight
Maneuvering-aerobatics
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On June 1, 2014, about 1222 central daylight time, a Yakovlev YAK-55M airplane, N176FD, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during an aerobatic flight over the Stevens 
Point Municipal Airport (STE), Stevens Point, Wisconsin. The airline transport pilot was fatally 
injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan. Day visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local airshow demonstration flight that departed about 1220.
The flight team manager, who provided the public announcement during the aerobatic flight, 
reported that the flight began with the airplane rolling inverted shortly after liftoff on runway 
21 and making a shallow inverted climb past show center. The airplane then rolled upright 
before entering a 90° turn away from show center and the crowd. The airplane continued to 
climb as it turned to a heading opposite that of the takeoff runway, turned back to the runway 
heading, and reentered the aerobatic box. The airplane rolled inverted before it entered a 45° 
dive toward show center. The airplane then completed several descending aileron rolls before it 
rolled wings level and entered a near vertical climb. At the apex of the climb/loop, the airplane 
entered an inverted flat spin. The flight team manager stated that the pilot normally entered 
the inverted flat spin at 3,000 ft above ground level (agl) and completed three rotations before 
recovering in a vertical dive with a 4-5 g pullup at show center; however, on the accident flight, 
the pilot appeared to enter the inverted spin about 500 ft lower than normal and complete 
more than 3 rotations before recovering into a dive. According to the the flight team manager, 
the airplane then pitched up and entered an "aggressive" left turn that resulted in an 
accelerated aerodynamic stall.
A review of ground-based video footage showed that the airplane had completed 3-1/2 
rotations in the inverted flat spin before it entered a near-vertical dive. The airplane pitched up 
momentarily before it developed a rapid left roll. The airplane subsequently entered a nose-
low, descending left spiral that continued to ground impact.
Page 4 of 10CEN14FA266
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
5-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/24/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/12/2014
Flight Time:
8266.1 hours (Total, all aircraft), 107.6 hours (Total, this make and model), 184.2 hours (Last 
90 days, all aircraft), 36 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0.8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the 47-year-old pilot held an 
airline transport pilot certificate with single engine land and sea, multiengine land, and 
instrument airplane ratings. The pilot was type-rated for the Airbus A320, Boeing 757, Boeing 
767, McDonnell Douglas DC-9, and Douglas DC-3 transport category airplanes. He also held a 
glider rating. The single engine land and sea airplane ratings were limited to commercial 
privileges. The glider rating was limited to private privileges. The pilot's last aviation medical 
examination was completed on March 24, 2014, when he was issued a first-class medical 
certificate with no restrictions or limitations. On September 16, 2013, the pilot completed an 
evaluation flight and was issued a Statement of Aerobatic Competency. A search of FAA 
records showed no previous accidents, incidents, or enforcement proceedings. His last flight 
review, as required by 14 CFR Part 61.56, was completed on May 12, 2014.
The pilot's flight history was established using his pilot logbook. His most recent logbook entry 
was completed on May 28, 2014, at which time he had accumulated 8,266.1 hours total flight 
time, of which 3,628.5 hours were listed as pilot-in-command. According to the logbook, the 
pilot had accumulated 3,608.8 hours in single-engine airplanes, 4,649.7 hours in multi-engine 
airplanes, and 4.7 hours in gliders. The pilot had flown 184.2 hours during the 90 days before 
the accident, 36 hours in the month before the accident, and 0.8 hours during the 24-hour 
period before the accident. The pilot had accumulated 107.6 hours in the accident airplane 
make/model. According to available documentation, the pilot had completed one aerobatic 
training flight in his authorized aerobatic practice box during the 8-month period before the 
accident. The single aerobatic training flight was completed on May 28, 2014, in the accident 
airplane.
Page 5 of 10CEN14FA266
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
YAKOVLEV
Registration:
N176FD
Model/Series:
YAK-55M 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1993
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
930810
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/29/2013, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
214.5 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Vedeneyev
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
M14P
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
360 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The airplane was a 1993 Yakovlev YAK-55M, serial number 930810. It was an aerobatic single-
place, single-engine airplane with a fixed conventional landing gear. The airplane was powered 
by a 360-horsepower, 9-cylinder Vendeneyev M14P radial engine, serial number KR0312035. 
The engine provided thrust through a constant-speed, three-blade, MT-Propeller MTV-9-B-C 
propeller, serial number 110600. The airplane had a maximum allowable takeoff weight of 
2,150 pounds. The pilot purchased the airplane on October 17, 2010. The airplane was issued 
an FAA experimental category airworthiness certificate for the purpose of exhibition and 
associated operating limitations on December 7, 2010.
According to the airplane maintenance records, the most recent condition inspection was 
completed on September 29, 2013. At the time of that inspection, the airframe and engine had 
accumulated 214.5 hours total time. The propeller had accumulated 51.4 hours total time. The 
last recorded maintenance was an engine oil change that was completed on May 22, 2014. A 
postaccident review of the maintenance records found no history of unresolved airworthiness 
issues. The recording hour (Hobbs) meter was damaged during the accident, and a definitive 
reading could not be obtained.
Page 6 of 10CEN14FA266
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
STE, 1110 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1215 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
283°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2900 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 21 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Stevens Point, WI (STE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Stevens Point, WI (STE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1220 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
At 1215, an automated surface weather observation station located at STE reported: wind 200° 
at 14 knots, gusting 21 knots; broken cloud ceilings at 2,900 ft agl and 3,600 ft agl; 10 miles 
surface visibility; temperature 26° Celsius; dew point 19° Celsius; and an altimeter setting of 
29.90 inches of mercury.
Airport Information
Airport:
Stevens Point Municipal (STE)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1110 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
21
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6028 ft / 120 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
The Stevens Point Municipal Airport, located about 3 miles northeast of Stevens Point, 
Wisconsin, was served by two asphalt runways, runway 3/21 (6,028 ft by 120 ft) and runway 
12/30 (3,635 ft by 75 ft). The airport elevation was 1,110 ft mean sea level.
Page 7 of 10CEN14FA266
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
44.543333, -89.521111
The accident site was located alongside a dirt road in a wooded area about 260 yards northeast 
of the runway 30 threshold. The elevation of the accident site was 1,095 ft. The main wreckage 
consisted of the entire airplane, which was orientated on a northwest heading. The wreckage 
was found in an upright position, and there was no appreciable wreckage debris path. The 
observed tree damage and the lack of a lateral debris path were consistent with a near vertical 
impact. All observed structural component failures were consistent with overstress separation, 
and there was no evidence of an inflight or postimpact fire. Flight control continuity was 
confirmed from all flight control surfaces to their respective cockpit controls. The engine was 
found in a 2.5 ft deep impact crater and remained partially attached to the firewall. Three 
engine cylinders had partially separated from the crankcase, which prevented the engine from 
being rotated. After removing several cylinders, an internal examination did not reveal any 
mechanical discontinuities within the engine drivetrain. The No. 1 magneto exhibited impact 
damage that prevented a functional test. The No. 2 magneto provided a spark on all leads when 
rotated. All three propeller blades were fragmented, consistent with the engine producing 
power at the time of impact. The postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any 
mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
Medical And Pathological Information
At the request of the Portage County Coroner, an autopsy was performed on the pilot at the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, located in Madison, 
Wisconsin. The cause of death was attributed to multiple blunt-force injuries sustained during 
the accident. The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory located in Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma, performed toxicology tests on samples obtained during the autopsy. The 
toxicological test results were negative for ethanol and all drugs and medications.
Tests And Research
A Garmin GPSMAP 396, serial number 67014609, was recovered from the wreckage and 
examined at the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Laboratory. The non-volatile data was recovered 
through a memory-chip recovery process. The final dataset was recorded on May 31, 2014, and 
was associated with a 0.8-hour flight from Menomonie Municipal Airport (LUM) to STE. The 
Garmin GPSMAP 396 device did not contain any data associated with the accident flight.
Page 8 of 10CEN14FA266
A GoPro Hero 3+ digital video camera, serial number 30C3CDE, was recovered from the 
wreckage and examined at the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Laboratory. A forensic recovery of the 
memory card revealed eight video files. Seven of the eight video files were not associated with 
the accident flight. The remaining video file contained 4 minutes 37 seconds of video footage 
from the accident flight.
A review of the available video footage established that the camera was mounted on the glare 
shield facing aft toward the pilot. The pilot's helmeted head, torso, hips, upper legs, and knees 
were in the field-of-view. Also visible were the pilot control stick, the inboard portions of both 
ailerons, the outboard portions of both horizontal stabilizers, and both elevator 
horns/counterbalances. The vertical stabilizer and rudder were obscured by the pilot's 
helmeted head. The video camera also recorded audio that detected changes in wind and 
engine noise during the accident flight.
A review of the video footage established that the flight controls were moving in conjunction 
with the pilot's control inputs and that he closed and locked the canopy before takeoff. The 
pilot initiated the takeoff by advancing the engine power lever gradually with his left hand. The 
airplane became airborne in a level attitude while over the runway 21 centerline. About 8 
seconds after liftoff, the pilot activated the smoke system with his right thumb on the control 
stick, and the airplane briefly entered a slight climb before it rolled to the right into an inverted 
attitude. The inverted airplane was slightly left of the runway 21 centerline. The pilot then 
pushed the control stick forward to initiate an inverted climb. During the inverted climb, the 
pilot turned the airplane away from the showline and eventually rolled the airplane upright and 
continued in a climbing left turn onto a downwind for runway 21. While on the downwind, the 
pilot made a radio call and activated the airplane's smoke system several times. The airplane 
continued to climb on the left crosswind and eventually turned upwind for runway 21.
At 03:53 (mm:ss) into the recording, the pilot made a radio call, activated the smoke system, 
and rolled the airplane inverted. After rolling inverted, the airplane continued to fly level 
briefly before the pilot applied aft control stick with both hands to establish a descending flight 
path of about 45°. The airplane then completed 2-1/2 right aileron rolls while descending, and 
smoke was observed trailing the airplane's flight path. By 04:06, the airplane was upright and 
wings level. The airplane then entered an inside loop maneuver. While the airplane was 
ascending, the two intersecting runways were visible outside the airplane's canopy. The 
longitudinal axis of the airplane appeared to be about 20° offset to the runway 3/21 centerline. 
At 04:17, the pilot reduced engine throttle, and the recorded audio track was consistent with a 
partial reduction in engine power. About 1 second later, the unrestrained portion of the pilot's 
shoulder harness straps (strap ends) fell toward the top of the airplane's canopy indicating the 
airplane had entered a negative-g environment. The pilot applied slight forward control stick 
with his right hand. By 04:19, the pilot further reduced the engine throttle and applied 
additional forward control stick input. The airplane's heading remained offset about 20° from 
the runway 3/21 centerline. The elevator horns/counterbalances showed that the elevator was 
near maximum deflection as the control stick approached the full forward position. The pilot 
then applied a left rudder input while holding the control stick in the full forward position. The 
observed smoke trail was consistent with the airplane yawing. By 04:27, the airplane was 
established in an inverted spin and had completed one rotation. The pilot was still holding full 
forward stick with some right aileron input. The airplane completed several rotations while in 
Page 9 of 10CEN14FA266
the inverted spin before the pilot began to move the control stick forward and applied right 
rudder. The airplane's rotation rate began to slow, and by 04:31, the control stick was being 
held in a neutral pitch position. The elevator was observed in a neutral position when 
compared to the horizontal stabilizer. The pilot then moved the control stick to the right, and 
both ailerons were observed to move in conjunction with the control stick position. The 
shoulder harness straps were still floating, consistent with the airplane still in a negative-g 
environment. The pilot was holding the control stick with a clenched right hand. At 04:32, the 
pilot applied a rapid left aileron and left rudder control input. The ailerons were observed to 
respond to the control stick movement. The shoulder harness straps were no longer floating, 
consistent with the airplane in a positive-g environment. The airplane rotation stopped, and 
there was an increase in engine noise.
About a second after the rotation had stopped, the pilot quickly centered the control stick 
before moving the control stick aft. The elevator was observed to move in conjunction with the 
control stick movement. The ailerons appeared to be in a neutral position as the airplane 
pitched up from a nose-low descent toward level flight. Within the next 2 seconds, the horizon 
became visible behind the airplane. The upright airplane was banked slightly to the right as the 
airplane neared a level flight attitude. At 04:34, the pilot moved his head to look over his right 
shoulder. The airplane continued to pitch up and subsequently entered a level climb. The pilot 
then turned his head back toward the center of the cockpit, his right hand was still firmly 
griping the control stick, and his left hand was on the engine throttle. Runway 3/21 was 
observed directly behind the airplane and perpendicular to the airplane's flight path. The 
airplane then entered an abrupt left roll with a positive pitch angle. The pilot had not 
commanded the left roll with aileron or rudder control input. The control stick position was 
consistent with an aft pitch and a neutral roll input. The observed positions of the ailerons and 
elevator were consistent with the control stick position.
The video footage was analyzed frame-by-frame, and the left roll rate appeared to increase 
rapidly between frames. The pilot was still griping the control stick with his right hand while 
his left hand remained on the engine throttle. As the left roll developed, the pilot moved the 
control stick to the right and partially reduced the aft pitch. The airplane continued to roll left, 
and the runway 30 threshold markings became visible below the airplane. During the left roll, 
the pilot added additional right roll control and further reduced the aft pitch input. The 
ailerons and elevator responded to the control stick movement. Throughout the left roll, the 
pilot was looking forward, and his right hand remained on the control stick and his left hand 
on the engine throttle. At 04:37, the video footage ended with the airplane still airborne and 
rolling to the left. The airplane had rolled beyond 90° to the horizon and the runway 30 
threshold markings were still visible under the airplane. The final impact sequence was not 
recorded by the video camera. However, during the final seconds of recorded video, the pilot's 
body positioning, active head movements, and flight control movements were consistent with 
him being conscious. Additionally, the review of the available video footage confirmed that the 
pilot had remained conscious throughout the aerobatic flight.
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
05/03/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Darrell C McCullion; Federal Aviation Administration - Milwaukee FSDO; Milwaukee, WI
Rob Holland; International Council of Airshows (ICAS); Leesburg, VA
Publish Date:
05/03/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89326
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
