Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Conroe, TX
Accident Number:
CEN12TA122
Date & Time:
01/03/2012, 2145 CST 
Registration:
N54872
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Collision during takeoff/land
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Public Aircraft
Analysis 
The airplane was at 1,600 feet mean sea level with the engine power set at 2,300 rpm. When 
the airplane was about 6 miles from the airport, the pilot heard a loud ﬁboomﬂ and the engine 
lost all power. The pilot did not have sufficient altitude to glide to the airport, so he landed the 
airplane on a street. When the airplane was on final approach to land, it collided with power 
lines. The pilot was able to land the airplane, but was forced to swerve to the right to avoid 
oncoming traffic. The right wing struck a utility pole, which resulted in substantial damage. 
A postaccident engine examination revealed that when the crankshaft was turned, there was no 
movement of the intake or exhaust valves or magneto gears. The rear crank gear bolt was loose 
and the gear dowel pin was sheared, which would cause the camshaft and rear accessory gears 
to stop turning. Metallurgical examination revealed beach markings at the aft end of the 
crankshaft approximately in plane with the aft face of the crankshaft where it mated to the 
crankshaft gear. There was fretting damage on the crankshaft gear, wear on the dowel pins, 
and wear on the lock washer, indicative of movement as a result of insufficient clamping force 
from the attachment bolt at the time of installation. The engine had accrued 752 hours since it 
was overhauled in August 2007.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Failure of the rear crankshaft gear dowel pin due to improper installation, which resulted in a 
total loss of engine power.
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng rear section - Failure (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incomplete action - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Environmental issues
Wire - Contributed to outcome
Pole - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 5CEN12TA122
Factual Information
On January 3, 2012, about 2145 central standards time, the pilot of a Cessna 172P, N54872, 
made a forced landing on a street in Conroe, Texas, after the engine lost power. The pilot, the 
sole occupant on board, was not injured. The public use airplane was substantially damaged. 
The airplane was registered to and operated by the Civil Air Patrol (CAP), Maxwell AFB, 
Alabama, as CAP flight 4272. Dark night visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at 
the time of the accident, and a company flight plan had been filed. The flight originated from 
the West Houston Airport (KIWS), Houston, Texas, approximately 2120, and was en route to 
Lone Star Executive Airport (KCXO), Conroe, Texas. 
According to the pilot™s statement, engine power was set at 2300 rpm (revolutions per minute) 
and the airplane was at 1,600 feet msl (mean sea level). When the airplane was about 6 miles 
from the destination airport, the pilot heard a loud ﬁboomﬂ and the engine lost all power. The 
pilot did not have sufficient altitude to glide to the airport and landed on Highway 105 and 
North 6th Street in Conroe, Texas. When the airplane was on final approach, it collided with 
power lines. The pilot was able to land the airplane, but was forced to swerve to the right to 
avoid oncoming traffic. The airplane struck a curb and spun around. The right wing struck a 
utility pole, resulting in substantial damage.
On January 24, the engine was disassembled and examined under the direction of a Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector at the facilities of Fritz Aviation in Fredericksburg, 
Texas. CAP records indicate the engine had accrued 752 hours since it was overhauled in 
August 2007. When the crankshaft was turned, no movement of the intake or exhaust valves or 
magneto gears was observed. Upon removal of the rear accessory case, it was discovered that 
the rear crank gear bolt was loose and the gear dowel pin (part number STD 1065) was 
sheared. According to the FAA inspector, there was a line on the dowel pin, similar to a pre-
existing crack. According to the attending mechanic™s report, the sheared dowel pin would 
cause the camshaft and rear accessory gears to stop turning.
The crankshaft gear, attachment bolt, and crankshaft dowel pin were submitted to the National 
Transportation Safety Board™s Materials Laboratory for examination. According their report, 
the dowel pin was fractured from the aft end of the crankshaft approximately in plane with the 
aft face of the crankshaft where it mated to the crankshaft gear. Magnified optical examination 
of the dowel pin fracture revealed a relatively flat transverse fracture with beach markings 
indicative of fatigue progression initiating at two locations on opposing sides on the outer 
diameter of the dowel pin. The fatigue region emanating from the origin area (primary origin 
area) was substantially larger than that emanating from the upper side. The cylinder faces of 
the dowel pin appeared relatively smooth and reflective consistent with wear of the original 
surfaces. The wear was present around most of the dowel pin periphery. The dowel pin™s 
diameter was reduced an estimated 0.005 inch by wear adjacent to the fatigue origin leaving a 
visible step. The crankshaft gear exhibited fretting damage on the forward face consistent with 
relative motion at the gear-to-crankshaft interface. The lock washer on the aft side of the 
crankshaft gear showed wear damage corresponding to contact with the underside of the 
attachment bolt head.
Page 3 of 5CEN12TA122
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Collision during takeoff/land (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
22, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/10/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
108 hours (Total, all aircraft), 83 hours (Total, this make and model), 66 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 39 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N54872
Model/Series:
172P 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17275074
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/28/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
89 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4757 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
CIVIL AIR PATROL, INC.
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
CIVIL AIR PATROL, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN12TA122
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KCXO
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
2153 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.61 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
0°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
HOUSTON, TX (KIWS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Conroe, TX (KCXO)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2120 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
30.308611, -95.450000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
04/20/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
DEL SCOTT; FAA FLIGHT STANDARDS DISTRICT OFFICE; HOUSTON, TX
BRIAN FRICKER; FAA FLIGHT STANDARDS DISTRICT OFFICE; SAN ANTONIO, TX
Publish Date:
04/20/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82616
Page 5 of 5CEN12TA122
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
