Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fort Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number:
MIA05LA066
Date & Time:
03/02/2005, 1833 EST 
Registration:
N88TN
Aircraft:
Cessna 402C
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
The pilot stated the airplane was about 5 miles north of Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport 
(FXE) and at approximately 4,000 feet mean sea level, when the airplane pitched sharply nose 
down, with an uncontrollable back and forth oscillation of the control yoke, lasting about 5 
seconds. A loud shearing noise was heard from the right rear of the aircraft before pitch control 
was regained. He looked toward the right rear of the airplane to see sheet metal flapping in the 
wind near the elevator section. He declared an emergency and he was cleared for immediate 
landing at FXE; the landing was uneventful. An examination by NTSB revealed a section of 
about 16 inches was missing from the right elevator's outboard area; which was later recovered 
about 5 miles north of FXE in a residential area. The remaining outboard of the elevator up to 
the inboard attaching hinge was peeled up and aft. The attaching hardware connecting the 
elevator trim tab horn to the elevator trim actuator push-rod was missing. No abnormality was 
observed to the areas and surfaces of the trim tab horn and the push-rod attaching area. The 
pilot was asked to demonstrate all the steps accomplished during the preflight prior to the 
accident flight and what type of nut was securing the trim tab horn to the trim tab push rod, a 
self locking nut or one that has a cotter pin? He did recall a nut however could not recall 
observing a cotter pin. The accident airplane had undergone inspections and maintenance on 
February 21, 2005, which included the overhaul of the elevator trim tab actuator. The 
mechanic, whom performed the tasks, stated that after the installation of the elevator trim tab 
actuator, he attached the elevator trim tab actuator push- rod to the elevator trim horn using a 
new bolt, washer, nut and cotter pin from the shop stock in accordance with the maintenance 
manual. Another mechanic stated that he was present and actually handed the cotter pin to the 
mechanic who performed the installation. An FAA inspector examined the maintenance facility 
and interviewed the mechanics that were involved in the tasks and stated that he did not 
observe any discrepancy with the bins of cotter pins. During the interview with the mechanic, 
the one mechanic stated that he remembers installing the cotter pin however he could not 
remember the exact cotter pin he installed and added the cotter pin was given to him by 
another mechanic. The FAA inspector instructed the other mechanic, who retrieved the cotter 
pin, to demonstrate where he got the cotter pin from. The mechanic went to the bin area and 
opened two bins. One of the bins had the proper cotter pin. The mechanic said he believed that 
he took the proper cotter pin. The pilot who test flew the accident airplane after maintenance 
Page 2 of 7MIA05LA066
stated that a preflight was accomplished and no irregularities were noted. The pilot added that 
he personally completed two test flights. The airplane owner's pilot completed a preflight of the 
accident airplane in the facility's hanger prior to signing the delivery receipt and a least two 
more times, prior to and during his en route flight to Florida. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper installation and securing of the elevator trim tab push-rod attaching hardware 
by maintenance personal resulting in the rod disconnecting and a partial separation of the 
right elevator in flight.
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - NORMAL
Findings
1. FLT CONTROL SYST,ELEVATOR TRIM/TAB CONTROL - NOT SECURED
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. FLT CONTROL SYST,ELEVATOR TRIM/TAB CONTROL - DISCONNECTED
4. FLIGHT CONTROL,ELEVATOR - FAILURE,PARTIAL
Page 3 of 7MIA05LA066
Factual Information
On March 02, 2005, about 1833 eastern standard time, a Cessna 402C, N88TN, registered to 
and operated by a private individual, as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 ferry flight, lost a section of the 
right elevator during descent and made an emergency landing at the Fort Lauderdale Executive 
Airport, Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed. The airline transport-rated pilot received no 
injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage. The flight originated from Suffolk 
Executive Airport, Suffolk, Virginia, earlier that day, about 1430.
The pilot stated the flight was a ferry flight from Waterville Robert LaFleur Airport, Waterville, 
Maine to Fort Lauderdale/ Hollywood International Airport (FLL), Florida, with one stop at 
Suffork for fuel. He started a descent to the FLL about 70 nautical miles north of the airport. 
The airplane was descending at a rate 500 feet per minute, normal cruise engine power setting 
and an indicated airspeed of 185 knots. The airplane was about 5 miles north of Fort 
Lauderdale Executive Airport (FXE) and at approximately 4,000 feet mean sea level, when the 
airplane pitched sharply nose down, with an uncontrollable back and forth oscillation of the 
control yoke.  A loud shearing noise was heard from the right rear of the aircraft before pitch 
control was regained. The oscillation lasted for about 5 seconds. He looked toward the right 
rear of the airplane to see sheet metal flapping in the wind near the elevator section. An 
emergency was declared to Miami approach and he was cleared for immediate landing at FXE. 
He lowered the landing gear, extended the flap and reduced indicated airspeed to 109 knots 
and landed on runway 26.
An examination by NTSB of the airplane revealed the empennage section of the airplane was 
distorted. The left elevator was bent and deformed at the elevator attaching hinge points. A 
section of about 16 inches was missing from the right elevator's outboard area. A section of the 
missing area was later recovered about 5 miles north of FXE in front of a residential home. The 
remaining outboard of the elevator up to the inboard attaching hinge was peeled up and aft. 
The hardware (nut, bolt, washer, and cotter pin) attaching the trim tab actuator screw 
assembly to the push-rod was observed to be new. The attaching hardware connecting the 
elevator trim tab horn to the elevator trim actuator push-rod was missing. No abnormality was 
observed to the areas and surfaces of the trim tab horn and the push-rod attaching area. 
The pilot was asked during an interview to demonstrate all the steps he accomplished when he 
did the preflight to the airplane before the accident flight. The question was asked to the pilot 
during the elevator trim tab check, what type of nut was securing the trim tab horn to the trim 
tab push rod, a self locking nut or one that has a cotter pin? He did recall a nut however could 
not recall observing a cotter pin.  
The accident airplane had undergone schedule inspections on February 21, 2005 and had 
maintenance accomplished to it. One of the maintenance tasks completed to the accident 
airplane was the overhaul of the elevator trim tab actuator. The overhaul requires the 
component to be removed from the airplane and installed after the overhaul. The mechanic, 
whom performed the tasks, stated that after the installation of the elevator trim tab actuator, 
he attached the elevator trim tab actuator push-rod to the elevator trim horn using a new bolt, 
washer, nut and cotter pin from the shop stock in accordance with the maintenance manual. 
Another mechanic stated that he was present and actually handed the cotter pin to the 
mechanic who installed the bolt that attaches the push-rod from the elevator trim tab actuator 
Page 4 of 7MIA05LA066
to the elevator trim tab horn.  He recalled the installing mechanic telling him, watch the eyes, 
as he trimmed the end of the cotter pin after installation.
An FAA inspector examined the facility where the maintenance was accomplished and 
interviewed the mechanics that were involved in the tasks. The FAA inspector stated that he 
checked several parts bin of different sizes of cotter pins including for the proper cotter pin 
required for that task. He did not find any mixed sizes or any incorrect numbering for any of 
the cotter pins in the individual bins and each bin was labeled with the proper number to the 
cotter pin contained in the bin. During the interview with the mechanic who installed the cotter 
pin, the mechanic stated that he remembers installing the cotter pin however he could not 
remember the exact cotter pin he installed and added the cotter pin was given to him by 
another mechanic. The FAA inspector instructed the mechanic, who retrieved the cotter pin, to 
demonstrate where he got the cotter pin from. The mechanic went to the bin area and opened 
two bins. One of the bins had the proper cotter pin. The mechanic said he believed that he took 
the proper cotter pin.
The facility where the maintenance was performed has a policy to test fly airplanes after all 
maintenance is completed; to ensure the facility has not missed any items. The pilot who test 
flew the accident airplane stated that the preflight was accomplished including all flight 
controls stops, bonding straps, attachments points and control actuation, trim tab movements 
on the ground, freedom of actuator and direction of travel and proper connectivity. The trim 
tab actuator elevator, aileron and rudder had hardware in place (cotter keys in place and tabs 
bent to prevent its falling out). No irregularities were noted. The pilot added that he personally 
completed two test flights prior to the accident airplane's delivery. The airplane owner's pilot 
completed a preflight of the accident airplane in the facility's hanger prior to signing the 
delivery receipt and a least two more times, prior to and during his en route flight to Florida.
Page 5 of 7MIA05LA066
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/01/2005
Flight Time:
1980 hours (Total, all aircraft), 350 hours (Total, this make and model), 300 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N88TN
Model/Series:
402C 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
402C-0621
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7210 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
8 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8753 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO520VB
Registered Owner:
Karl W. Doane III
Rated Power:
325 hp
Operator:
Karl W. Doane III
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7MIA05LA066
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FXE, 13 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
16 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / -12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Suffolk, VA (KSFQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Fort Lauderdale, FL (FLL)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1430 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Fort Lauderdale Executive (FXE)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
13 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
26.197222, -80.170556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jose  L Obregon
Adopted Date:
04/25/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven J Petrossian; Fort Lauderdale FSDO-17; Fort Lauderdale, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7MIA05LA066
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
