National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DAINGERFIELD, TX
Accident Number: FTW99LA078
Date & Time: 02/02/1999, 1615 CST
Registration: N44174
Aircraft: Taylorcraft BC12-D1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
 Analysis The 1946 model airplane impacted trees following a loss of control.
The pilot stated that the airplane was in cruise flight at 2,100 feet MSL, when he heard a 'loud pop.'
The airplane spiraled to the left about 2.5 times before impacting trees.
An aircraft mechanic and FAA inspector found the left wing cross brace wires loose, but could not determine if the loose wires were a pre-impact condition.
They also found an aileron bolt installed upside down, 'causing it to rub against the wing.'
The pilot could not remember if the aileron movement was restricted; he could only remember using full right rudder in attempt to keep the airplane level.
Photographs of the airplane in the tree reveal that the ailerons were positioned for a right turn.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An undetermined airframe malfunction which rendered the aircraft uncontrollable.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) AIRFRAME - UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 2.
The airline transport pilot, who was the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by C&B Aircraft of Powderly, Texas.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 ferry flight and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from the Shreveport Regional Airport, Shreveport, Louisiana, at 1507, and was destined for Paris, Texas.
According to the pilot, the airplane was in cruise flight at 2,100 feet MSL, when he heard a "loud pop."
Subsequently, the airplane entered a "flat spiral to the left."
The airplane spiraled 2.5 times before it impacted 75-foot trees and came to rest suspended in tree limbs 25 feet above the ground.
The pilot exited the airplane and climbed down the tree unassisted.
An FAA inspector examined the airplane and reported that a wing spar was damaged and the propeller was destroyed.
The fuselage, aft of the cockpit, was structurally damaged.
In the enclosed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot stated that "the cause of the accident was structural failure."
According to an aircraft mechanic, who examined the airplane in the presence of the FAA inspector, the left wing cross brace wires were found loose and intact, but he could not say with certainty if the loose wires were a pre-impact condition.
The mechanic also stated that a bolt in the right aileron had been installed upside down, "causing it to rub against the wing."
He could not determine if the bolt had restricted the pilot's ability to move the ailerons.
The pilot could not remember if the aileron movement was restricted; he could only remember applying full right rudder in an attempt to keep the airplane from rolling left inverted.
Photographs of the airplane in the tree show the ailerons positioned for a turn to the right (right aileron full up and left aileron full down).
According to the airplane's maintenance records, the last annual inspection on the engine and airframe was completed on November 15, 1998.
Total time on the 1946 model airplane was reported at 1,632 hours.
No other pertinent maintenance entries were noted.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
