National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WEST DELTA 105B, GM
Accident Number: FTW99LA077
Date & Time: 02/01/1999, 1056 CST
Registration: N6603X
Aircraft: Bell 206L-3
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The helicopter's tail rotor made contact with the offshore platform's windsock during final approach to landing.
The pilot heard a buzzing sound followed by a right yaw.
He then executed a hovering autorotation to the platform.
Inspection of the windsock support frame showed signs of tail rotor impact damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the oil platform's windsock on final approach to landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
OBJECT - WIND SOCK/INDICATOR 2.
The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant of the helicopter, was not injured.
The helicopter was registered to and operated by Petroleum Helicopters, Inc., of Lafayette, Louisiana.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a company flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 positioning flight which originated from the South Pass 25 offshore platform at 0915.
The pilot was positioning the helicopter to the West Delta 105B offshore platform when, according to the pilot's written statement, he heard a "buzzing sound followed by a right yaw."
The pilot then executed a hovering autorotation to the platform.
The pilot stated that he suspected that the tail rotor blades contacted the wind sock during the approach.
The wind sock's internal frame showed evidence of a tail rotor blade strike.
Maintenance personnel reported that one of the tail rotor blades was missing approximately the outboard four inches.
The tail rotor gear box was torn from its mounting and the tail boom had sustained structural damage.
According to company flight records, the pilot had accumulated 3,893 hours total flight time, of which 2,517 hours were in the Bell 206L-3.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 36, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 4150 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 61 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time: 9971 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: 250-C30P Registered Owner: PETROLEUM HELICOPTERS, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
