National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ANCHORAGE, AK
Accident Number: ANC99TA026
Date & Time: 02/03/1999, 1030 AST
Registration: N7875D
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
 Analysis The certificated airline transport pilot was returning to a maintenance vendor's hangar after completing a maintenance operational check flight.
He said that while taxiing on an ice covered parking area, he applied power to taxi up a small incline.
He said that as the airplane's skis went over the top of the incline, he closed the throttle, and reached for the mixture control cut off.
He noted that his sleeve caught on the throttle control, advancing it to the open position.
He said that he was unable to stop the airplane, and the left wing struck a parked maintenance tug.
The left wing sustained substantial damage.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's use of excessive taxispeed.
Factors associated with the accident were an icy taxi area, and the inadvertent activation of the throttle.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ICY 2.
(F) THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - INADVERTENT ACTIVATION - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) TAXISPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 4.
OBJECT - VEHICLE Factual Information On February 3, 1999, about 1030 Alaska standard time, a ski equipped Piper PA-18-150 airplane, N7875D, sustained substantial damage while taxiing at Lake Hood, Anchorage, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area flight when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the U.S. Department of Interior, on a public use mission.
The solo airline transport pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
In his written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, the pilot reported that he was returning to a maintenance vendor's hangar after completing a maintenance operational check flight.
He said that while taxiing on an ice covered parking area, he applied power to taxi up a small incline.
He said that as the airplane's skis went over the top of the incline, he closed the throttle, and reached for the mixture control cut off.
He noted that his sleeve caught on the throttle control, advancing it to the open position.
He said that he was unable to stop the airplane, and the left wing struck a parked maintenance tug.
The left wing sustained substantial damage.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
