National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PAXTON, IL
Accident Number: CHI99LA081
Date & Time: 02/03/1999, 1031 CST
Registration: N704BF
Aircraft: Cessna 150M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot stated that after flying for 2.5 hours, he decided to land at an airport near Champaign, Illinois, and missed the airport due to the wind.
The pilot stated that he then diverted to Paxton, Illinois, and after six attempts was unable to locate the airport.
The pilot stated that the airplane ran out of fuel and he declared an emergency.
An off airport landing was made into a plowed farm field 2.5 miles west of the Paxton Airport.
The forced landing was made on a heading of 020 degrees.
A weather report for a reporting station located 27 nautical miles and 190 degrees from the accident site reported winds from 180 degrees at 20 knots gusting to 26 knots.
The left wing fuel tank contained no fuel and the right wing fuel tank contained less than one cupful of fuel.
Examination of the airplane revealed no other anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the inadequate preflight planning by the pilot in command and the exhaustion of usable fuel.
Factors were the tailwind landing condition and the rough terrain at the landing site.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN Factual Information On February 3, 1999, at 1031 central standard time (cst), a Cessna 150M, N704BF, piloted by a private pilot, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing near Paxton, Illinois, after a loss of engine power during cruise flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot reported minor injuries.
The flight originated at Tevis Field, near Chanute, Kansas, at 0710 cst, and was en route to Detroit, Michigan.
In his written statement, the pilot stated that after flying for 2.5 hours, he decided to land at an airport near Champaign, Illinois, and missed the airport due to the wind.
The pilot stated that he then diverted to Paxton, Illinois, and after six attempts was unable to locate the airport.
The pilot stated that the airplane ran out of fuel and he declared an emergency.
An off airport landing was made into a plowed farm field 2.5 miles west of the Paxton airport.
The pilot reported losing consciousness for an unknown amount of time following the accident.
Post accident investigation showed substantial damage to the left wing and vertical stabilizer.
The forced landing was made on a heading of 020 degrees.
A weather report for a reporting station located 27 nautical miles and 190 degrees from the accident site reported winds from 180 degrees at 20 knots gusting to 26 knots.
The left wing fuel tank contained no fuel and the right wing fuel tank contained less than one cupful of fuel.
Examination of the airplane revealed no other anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 30 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 8036 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-200 Registered Owner: TEVIS AVIATION, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
