National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ODESSA, MO
Accident Number: CHI99LA082
Date & Time: 02/02/1999, 0900 CST
Registration: N67568
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The instructor pilot was giving the student practice in forced landings when the engine suffered a sustained total loss of power.
The instructor attempted to re-start the engine with negative results.
He then conducted an actual forced landing in a rough field where the airplane sustained substantial damage.
A post accident examination of the engine failed to reveal any mechanical anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the total loss of engine power for reasons undetermined.
Factors were total loss of engine power, the instructor pilot's encounter with unsuitable terrain, and the rough terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) POWERPLANT - FAILURE,TOTAL 2.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 4.
The instructor reported no injuries.
The dual student reported minor injuries.
The instructional flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91, in visual meteorological conditions.
The local flight departed Warrensburg, Missouri, about 0800.
In his written statement, the instructor pilot said that he intended to instruct the dual student in emergency procedures.
He said that during a simulated loss of power, the engine actually did quit and the propeller stopped.
He said that he took over control of the airplane and attempted to re-start the engine with negative results.
He then conducted a forced landing where on touchdown the nosewheel dug into rough terrain and resulted in substantial damage to the airplane.
An examination of the airplane after the accident failed to reveal any mechanical problems with the engine.
There was continuity throughout, and the was fuel in the tanks and fuel lines.
The engine control continuity was verified.
The engine was test run after the accident and operated.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
