National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LAS VEGAS, NV
Accident Number: LAX99LA087
Date & Time: 02/01/1999, 0710 PST
Registration: N640AW
Aircraft: Airbus Industrie A-320-232
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 134 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis According to the statements of the three cabin attendants and the flight crew, the aircraft had been in light to moderate turbulence for most of the flight.
The seat belt sign was illuminated and several public address system announcements had been made for the passengers to remain seated with their seat belts fastened.
The flight and cabin crewmembers reported that at the time of the incident the turbulence had abated and the ride was smooth; however, the seat belt sign remained illuminated.
A 70-year-old male passenger in seat 23C got up and began walking toward the aft lavatory.
One cabin attendant told the passenger to return to his seat unless it was an absolute necessity to visit the lavatory.
The passenger, who has two artificial legs, declined to follow the cabin attendant's instruction and continued to the aft galley area where he fell, fracturing his hip.
The crew obtained medical advice by radio from Med Link, and, after consultation with a physician, the aircraft continued to its destination.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The injured passenger's failure to follow the instructions of the cabin attendants.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT COMPLIED WITH - PASSENGER Factual Information On February 1, 1999, about 0710 hours Pacific standard time, a passenger sustained a fractured hip on America West Airlines Flight 5 while en route between Tampa, Florida, and Las Vegas, Nevada.
The accident occurred while the aircraft was in cruise flight at flight level 310, approximately 1.5 hours after departure from Tampa.
The aircraft, an Airbus A320-232, N640AW, was not damaged.
The captain, first officer, 3 cabin attendants and the remaining 129 passengers were not injured.
The operation was conducted under 14 CFR Part 121 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as a scheduled domestic passenger flight, which originated in Tampa at 0640 eastern standard time as a non-stop flight to Las Vegas.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed.
According to the statements of the three cabin attendants and the flight crew, the aircraft had been in light to moderate turbulence for most of the flight.
The seat belt sign was illuminated and several public address system announcements had been made for the passengers to remain seated with their seat belts fastened.
The flight and cabin crewmembers reported that at the time of the incident the turbulence had abated and the ride was smooth; however, the seat belt sign remained illuminated.
A 70-year-old male passenger in seat 23C got up and began walking toward the aft lavatory.
One cabin attendant told the passenger to return to his seat unless it was an absolute necessity to visit the lavatory.
The passenger, who has two artificial legs, declined to follow the cabin attendant's instruction and continued to the aft galley area where he fell, fracturing his hip.
The crew obtained medical advice by radio from Med Link, and, after consultation with a physician, the aircraft continued to its destination.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 35, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
