National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Langley, WA
Accident Number: SEA04LA152
Date & Time: 08/01/2004, 1030 PDT
Registration: N70P
Aircraft: Paulick Wittman W-10
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Shortly after the aircraft took off, witnesses reported that the airplane did not attain an altitude sufficient to clear trees.
The aircraft collided with trees and terrain near the departure end of the runway.
A post-crash fire consumed the wreckage.
Post-accident inspection of the heat distressed airframe and engine did not reveal evidence of a mechanical failure or malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight preparation to assure adequate takeoff performance to clear obstacles, and his failure to maintain obstacle clearance.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the local flight.
The aircraft was destroyed by impact damage and post-crash fire.
The private pilot, the sole occupant, was fatally injured.
A witness reported that shortly after the aircraft took off from runway 16, the aircraft did not attain an altitude sufficient to clear trees.
After the impact, a post-crash fire consumed the wreckage.
The pilot's flight logbook was not located for review.
The Federal Aviation Administration Aero Medical Division reported that the pilot's last medical certificate, a Class III, was issued on February 3, 1999.
At this time, the pilot reported a total flight time of 4,000 hours.
The wreckage was removed from the accident site and transported to the pilot's hangar at the airpark.
Inspectors from the Seattle, Washington, Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards District Office, reported that the engine displayed severe heat distress and impact damage.
The crankcase was distorted, however, all connecting rods appeared to be connected to the crankshaft.
The crankshaft would not turn.
The oil pan was melted away.
Both magnetos were heat distressed and their function could not be determined.
The carburetor was destroyed.
The fuel strainer and oil filter adapter assembly were intact, however, the lines to both were destroyed.
Control continuity to the elevator control system was established, however, damaged and heat distressed.
The fuselage structure was heat distressed and the fabric covering was burned away.
Maintenance logbooks were not located for review.
The Island County Coroner's Office, Coupeville, Washington, conducted an autopsy.
Dr. Andrea R. Capiola, Island County Deputy Coroner, reported that pilot's cause of death as: "Thermal burns"  The coroner's report indicated an interview with the pilot's wife.
During the interview, the Coroner learned that the pilot had experienced "a minor heart attack" about a year ago, but that since, the pilot was "in excellent health and was very lively."
The pilot's wife reported that on the morning of the accident, he indicated to her that he was not planning on flying that day.
The wife also indicated that the pilot was planning on selling the aircraft that was involved in the accident.
Toxicological samples were sent to the Federal Aviation Administration Civil Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, for analysis.
The results of the analysis were positive for Metoprolol detected in blood and present in urine.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
