National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mazama, WA
Accident Number: SEA04LA134
Date & Time: 08/01/2004, 1430 PDT
Registration: N7815Z
Aircraft: Cessna 150C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he noted no problems with the airplane during the preflight inspection and the engine runup.
After liftoff on runway 29, the airplane climbed to treetop level, at which point a gust of wind pushed the airplane left toward trees bordering the runway.
The pilot had to bank the airplane to avoid the trees, and the airplane stopped climbing.
After "barely clearing" the trees at the end of the runway, the pilot elected to put the airplane back on the ground as he was concerned the airplane might not clear trees located further ahead.
He selected a streambed as an emergency landing site.
During the emergency landing, the airplane contacted trees along the edge of the streambed.
The pilot reported that the temperature was 88 degrees F and the winds were from 300 degrees at 3 knots.
The airport elevation was 2,415 feet, and the density altitude was calculated to be approximately 5,000 feet.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the weather conditions and his failure to maintain the initial takeoff climb, which resulted in a collision with trees during an emergency landing.
Contributing factors were the unfavorable wind and high density altitude weather conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - UNFAVORABLE WIND 3.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) CLIMB - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 6.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On August 1, 2004, approximately 1430 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 150C, N7815Z, lost altitude and struck trees during the initial takeoff climb from the Lost River Resort Airport, Mazama, Washington.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, the private pilot received serious injuries, and the passenger received minor injuries.
The airplane was being operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident with an intended destination of Arlington Municipal Airport, Arlington, Washington.
The deputy reported that he did not see any indication the airplane hit the trees located at the end of the runway, but actually cleared those trees, then descended, contacted the ground and slid about 40 feet into another group of trees.
The airplane came to rest about 150 yards from the departure end of the runway.
The deputy reported that the temperature was 92 degrees Fahrenheit (F), the humidity was 23%, and the wind was from the north at about 6 mph.
In a telephone interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge on August 3, 2004, the pilot stated that he noted no problems with the airplane during the preflight inspection and the engine runup.
After liftoff, the airplane climbed to treetop level, at which point a gust of wind pushed the airplane left towards the trees bordering the runway.
The pilot had to bank the airplane to avoid the trees, and the airplane stopped climbing.
After "barely clearing" the trees at the end of the runway, the pilot elected to put the airplane back on the ground as he was concerned the airplane might not clear trees located further ahead.
He selected a streambed as an emergency landing site.
During the emergency landing, the airplane contacted trees along the edge of the streambed.
The pilot reported that the temperature was 88 degrees F and the winds were from 300 degrees at 3 knots.
The pilot did not recall the current altimeter setting.
At 1453, the nearest weather reporting station, located at Omak, Washington approximately 41 nautical miles east of the accident site, reported an altimeter setting of 29.74 inches.
Using the airport elevation of 2,415 feet, a temperature of 88 degrees F, and an altimeter setting of 29.74 inches, the density altitude was calculated as 5,048 feet.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 38, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
