Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
POHNPEI, PO
Accident Number:
LAX99LA292
Date & Time:
09/01/1999, 1000  
Registration:
N42054
Aircraft:
Hughes 369HS
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The helicopter took off from the fishing vessel to conduct tuna spotting operations, and 
crashed under unknown circumstances approximately 1 1/2 hours later.  The pilot had made 
routine communication with the ship captain via radio about 10 minutes before the accident.  
No emergency calls were received by the ship.  The helicopter was about 30 miles away from 
the ship at the time of the accident.  The ship's crewmembers located only the helicopter's 
floats, pieces of the airframe, and the engine.  The ship captain reported that the sea was flat 
and clear.  There were no birds or fish noted around the accident site.  The pilot had been on 
the ship since August 25, 1999, and had flown about 4 hours.  The captain and crew reported 
that the pilot, who also performed duties as the mechanic, had not mentioned any mechanical 
problems with the aircraft.  The operator estimated that the helicopter had approximately 64 
gallons of fuel on board when it departed.  No debris or contamination was noted in the fuel 
samples.  The engine did not reveal any preimpact damage and appeared to have been rotating 
at the time of impact. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
An in-flight collision with the water for undetermined reasons. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER
2. REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
Page 2 of 6LAX99LA292
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 1999, about 1000 hours local ship time, a Hughes 369HS, N42054, crashed 
into the Pacific Ocean about 600 miles south of Pohnpei, Federal States of Micronesia, under 
unknown circumstances.  The helicopter, operated by Hoffman Helicopters, Inc., of Yona, 
Guam, was destroyed.  The commercial pilot and non pilot-rated observer were fatally injured.  
The local aerial observation flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and 
had originated from a fishing vessel about 0830.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed.
The captain of the fishing vessel reported that the pilot and observer had been conducting tuna 
spotting operations.  He had established radio communication with the pilot at the beginning 
of the accident flight and re-established communication approximately every 10 minutes.  The 
last radio contact with the helicopter occurred at 0950.  When the captain radioed the 
helicopter about 1000, he received no response.  He then headed for the helicopter's last 
known position.  The ship was approximately 30 miles away at that time, and took 
approximately 2 1/2 hours to reach the site.  When the ship arrived at the site, the 
crewmembers found the helicopter floating upside-down.  They located and recovered the 
helicopter's floats, pieces of the airframe, and the engine.  They did not find any other 
components.  Both occupants of the accident helicopter had their seat belts and shoulder 
harnesses fastened and secured.  They also had life jackets on, but not inflated.  The life raft 
was not inflated.  The captain stated that neither occupant appeared to have survived the 
impact.
The captain took note of the weather conditions at the accident site.  He stated that the winds 
were calm, the sky was clear with no ceiling, and visibility was 30 miles or greater.  The sea was 
flat and clear.
The operator reported that the ship had departed from Guam on August 25, 1999.  Since then, 
the pilot had flown three flights with a total of about 4 flight hours.  The pilot also performed 
duties aboard the ship as the mechanic. 
The captain and crew of the fishing vessel were interviewed through an interpreter.  A copy of 
the interviews is appended to this file.  None of the crew reported knowledge of any mechanical 
problems with the helicopter.
Research with various tuna spotting operators revealed that normal procedures for fish 
spotting involved launching the helicopter to search for any indication of fish.  The pilot would 
look for logs or birds, or any object that would attract fish.  If fish were spotted, the pilot would 
notify the captain, and the ship would head in that direction.
During the interview, the captain was asked whether the pilot had reported finding fish during 
the accident flight.  The captain answered, "No."  He stated that it was just a routine search.  
The captain further stated that he didn't notice any birds around the accident site.
The operator estimated that the helicopter had approximately 64 gallons of fuel on board when 
it departed the day of the accident.  When the ship returned to Guam following the accident, 
the operator took a fuel sample from the ship's day tank and reported that it appeared normal.  
The original fuel sample, taken when the tanks were filled in Guam, was still in the fuel box on 
Page 3 of 6LAX99LA292
the ship's flight deck.  The operator stated that it also appeared normal with no sediment or 
discoloration.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The maintenance logbooks were reviewed.  The helicopter had undergone an annual inspection 
in Guam on August 22, 1999, and had flown 4 hours since then.  The airframe total time was 
recorded as 4,716 hours and the engine total time was 10,491 hours.  
The records also indicated that the pilot/mechanic had not performed any maintenance to the 
helicopter since departing Guam. 
CREW INFORMATION
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman certification database, the 
pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single engine land and rotorcraft-
helicopter ratings.  He held a flight instructor certificate for helicopters and an FAA first-class 
medical certificate, issued August 18, 1999.  The FAA mechanic database revealed that the pilot 
also held a mechanic certificate with airframe and power plant ratings.  The pilot was also 
licensed as a commercial helicopter pilot in New Zealand.
The operator indicated that the pilot had 8,276 hours of total flight time, including 7,827 hours 
in rotorcraft, and 650 hours in the accident make and model.
According to the operator, the observer was a citizen of Taiwan, and was not a rated pilot.
AIRCRAFT EXAMINATION
The engine was placed in a tub of diesel fuel to prevent further saltwater corrosion following 
recovery.  The engine and airframe debris were then shipped to the Safety Board in Los 
Angeles, California.  A teardown and examination of the engine was performed on December 2, 
1999.
The engine evidenced external and internal damage consistent with the effects of saltwater 
corrosion.  All connections for the oil supply, scavenge, and pneumatic lines were secure at 
their fittings.  Fuel was present in the fuel lines.  The top and bottom chip plugs were removed 
and inspected.  They were both clean and absent of debris.  Oil was present in the gearbox.
The compressor would not rotate and the case halves were opened for further inspection.  
There were small pieces of plastic and other debris present.  Minor foreign object damage was 
evidenced on some of the blades, opposite the direction of rotation.  There was no visual 
damage to the compressor bearings or spur adapter gearshaft assembly.  
The turbine was removed and a visual inspection revealed no damage to the turbine wheels or 
nozzles.  The turbine exhaust collector evidenced damage.  The thermocouple harness was bent 
inward toward the turbine support.  The horizontal and vertical fire shields were bent and 
dented.
All engine accessories were removed.  There was no damage noted to the shaft or external 
housing.
The airframe debris was examined.  The seat structures were still attached to the seat tracks.  
The lap belts and shoulder harnesses were intact and appeared to function properly.  The 
helicopter was equipped for left-seat command.  Dual controls were not installed.
Page 4 of 6LAX99LA292
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/18/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
8276 hours (Total, all aircraft), 650 hours (Total, this make and model), 100 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Hughes
Registration:
N42054
Model/Series:
369HS 369HS
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
520379S
Landing Gear Type: 
Float; Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/22/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4716 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20
Registered Owner:
HOFFMAN HELICOPTERS INC.
Rated Power:
375 hp
Operator:
HOFFMAN HELICOPTERS INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX99LA292
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
FISHING VESSEL 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0830 
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
NOELANI      MARS
Adopted Date:
12/05/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
GARY M SUOZZI; SAN FRANCISCO, CA
MIKE   WEBER; INDIANAPOLIS, IN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX99LA292
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
