National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KEYSTONE HEIGHT, FL
Accident Number: ATL99LA003
Date & Time: 10/02/1998, 1030 EST
Registration: N54114
Aircraft: Auxier Herschel A Jr. SEA REY
AMPHIBIAN
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, after about nine touch and go landings on Lake Geneva, he noticed the tenth takeoff was sluggish and required more time to get off the water.
Once airborne the aircraft began a left bank, and aileron control would not correct for it.
The aircraft spiraled left until the left wingtip and nose contacted the water.
The pilot stated that he may not have reached minimum control speed before takeoff and stalled the aircraft.
Examination of the airplane found no mechanical defects.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilots failure to attain adequate airspeed, which resulted in a stall, and loss of control.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) STALL ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER Factual Information On October 2, 1998, about 1030 Eastern Standard Time an Auxier Herschel A. Jr. Sea Rey Amphibian homebuilt airplane, N54114, collided with water shortly after takeoff at Lake Geneva, in Keystone Heights, Florida.
The airplane was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight.
The private pilot was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight originated from Melrose, Florida, about 0930.
According to the pilot, after about nine touch and go landings on Lake Geneva, he noticed the tenth takeoff was sluggish and required more time to get off the water.
Once airborne at about 20 to 30 feet above the ground the aircraft began a left turn, and aileron input would not correct for it.
The aircraft spiraled left until the left wingtip and nose contacted the water.
Just prior to impact the pilot stated that he pulled the throttle back when he realized he had no aileron control to minimize the impact with the water.
He estimated the speed at impact at about 40 to 45 miles per hour.
According to the FAA Inspector on-scene, the pilot stated to him that he may not have reached minimum control speed before takeoff and stalled the aircraft.
Examination of the airplane found no mechanical defects, and the pilot was not certificated for a single engine sea plane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 59, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam: 06/02/1997 Occupational Pilot: Last Flight Review or Equivalent: Flight Time: 910 hours (Total, all aircraft), 47 hours (Total, this make and model), 910 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft) Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information Aircraft Make: Auxier Herschel A Jr.
Registration: N54114 Model/Series: SEA REY AMPHIBIAN SEA REY AM Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Serial Number: 1DK063 Landing Gear Type: Amphibian Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: Unknown Certified Max Gross Wt.
: 1370 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 39 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Rotax ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: 912UL Registered Owner: AUXIER HERSCHEL AINSWORTH JR.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
