National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TELLASSE, AL
Accident Number: ATL99LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/1998, 0835 CDT
Registration: N4832R
Aircraft: Cessna 188B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot was approaching from the northeast for a swath spray, waiting to fly over power lines that intersected a cotton field at the arrival end.
The pilot thought that he was clear to push over into the cotton field to start his spray run.
However, he was not completely clear of the power lines and on the push over became entangled with the ridge wire that runs from one pole to another giving the poles stability.
The wire tangled between the propeller blades and around the propeller shaft slowing the engine to a stop.
While tethered by the cable the aircraft fell approximately 250 to 300 feet, striking a slope and turning almost 180 degrees from the direction of impact.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from a utility line while conducting a swath run.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
OBJECT - WIRE,STATIC 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On October 2, 1998 about 0835 Central Daylight Time, a Cessna 188B agricultural airplane, N4832R, collided with a high tension line and subsequently the ground while spraying a field in Tellasse, Alabama.
The airplane was operated by Morris Flying Services, Inc., under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight.
The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries and the airplane received substantial damage.
The flight originated from Shorter, Alabama, at 0750.
According to the FAA Inspector, who interviewed the pilot, the pilot was approaching from the northeast for a swath spray, waiting to fly over power lines that intersected a cotton field at the arrival end.
The pilot thought that he was clear to push over into the cotton field to start his spray run.
However, he was not completely clear of the power lines and on the push over became entangled with the ridge wire that runs from one pole to another giving the poles stability.
The wire tangled between the propeller blades and around the propeller shaft slowing the engine to a stop.
While tethered by the cable the aircraft fell approximately 250 to 300 feet, striking a slope and turning almost 180 degrees from the direction of impact, substantially damaging the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 22, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 4200 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Engine Model/Series: IO-520-D Registered Owner: MORRIS FLYING SERVICES, INC Rated Power: 285 hp Operator: WILLIAM HARRY MC GOWAN Operating Certificate(s) Held: Operator Does Business As: MORRIS FLYING SERVICES, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
