National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TOMBALL, TX
Accident Number: FTW99LA062
Date & Time: 10/01/1998, 1230 CDT
Registration: N527SS
Aircraft: Diamond Aircraft Industries DA 20-
A1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During takeoff, at about 400 feet, the canopy separated from the airplane.
The pilot turned the airplane back towards the airport and landed without further incident.
The pilot reported that he did not explain to the passenger that the right side of the canopy needed to be latched before takeoff.
The pilot also reported that he did not observe the canopy warning light during taxi to the runway, nor did he complete the 'Canopy-Secure' portion of the pre-takeoff checklist.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to follow the checklist and secure the canopy, which resulted in the canopy separating from the airplane during takeoff initial climb.
A factor was the pilot's failure to detect the canopy warning light prior to takeoff.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) CHECKLIST - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) CAUTION/WARNING SYSTEM/LIGHT(S) - NOT IDENTIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) WINDOW,CANOPY - NOT SECURED 4.
(C) WINDOW,CANOPY - SEPARATION Factual Information On October 1, 1998, at 1230 central daylight time, a Diamond Aircraft Industries DA 20-A1 single-engine airplane, N527SS, was substantially damaged when the canopy separated during takeoff from David Wayne Hooks Memorial Airport near Tomball, Texas.
The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was registered to MDFC Equipment Leasing Corporation of Long Beach, California, and operated by Flight Academy International of Spring, Texas.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal flight, which was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot did not explain to the passenger that the right side of the canopy needed to be latched before takeoff.
The pilot stated that he did not observe the canopy warning light during taxi to the runway, nor did he complete the "Canopy-Secure" portion of the pre-takeoff checklist.
The pilot also stated that after takeoff from runway 17L, at about 400 feet, he heard a "rapid- sounding noise for several repetitions, followed by the canopy disengaging itself from the fuselage."
Following the separation of the canopy, the pilot's headset was lost from the "burst of wind."
As a result, tower communication was not possible.
The pilot turned the aircraft back towards the airport and landed on runway 35L "without further damage to [the] aircraft."
The canopy was recovered approximately 1/4 mile south of the localizer antennas for runway 17R.
According to the FAA inspector, the main structural spar behind the cockpit, to which the canopy was attached, sustained damage.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 28, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1609 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 32 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 680 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Rotax ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: 912/F3 Registered Owner: MDFC EQUIPMENT LEASING CORP.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
