National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BALL GROUND, GA
Accident Number: ATL99LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1998, 1545 EDT
Registration: N5588R
Aircraft: Cessna C-172F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, he was on his third takeoff of the day from his newly built private field.
The runway was 1000 feet long by 42 feet wide, covered mostly in grass with some packed soil.
As he became airborne, he experienced a left quartering wind gust, which pushed the airplane to the right.
The right wing collided with a tree and the airplane spun to the right resulting in substantial damage to the airplane.
The pilot, and sole occupant, was not injured.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilots failure to maintain directional control of the airplane on take-off, during gusty conditions, resulting in a collision with a tree.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH OBSTRUCTION(S) Factual Information On October 1, 1998, about 1545 eastern daylight time,  a Cessna 172F, N 5588R,  collided with a tree and the ground on takeoff from a private field in Ball Ground, Georgia.
The airplane was operated by the registered owner under the provisions of Title 14 CFR part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight.
The private pilot, and sole occupant,  was not injured and the airplane sustained substantial damaged.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot, he was on his third takeoff of the day from his newly built private field.
The runway was 1000 feet long by 42 feet wide, covered mostly in grass with some packed soil.
As he became airborne, he experienced a left quartering wind gust, which pushed the airplane to the right.
The right wing collided with a tree and the airplane spun to the right resulting in substantial damage to the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 63, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
