National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: VENICE, FL
Accident Number: MIA99LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1998, 1700 EDT
Registration: N733HK
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the fourth and final landing, the airplane touched down and bounced 2 or 3 times; during this time the throttle was at idle and the elevator control was full aft.
After the airplane landed on the runway, he elected to perform a go-around and applied power but there was no response from the elevator.
He aborted the takeoff and the airplane veered off the left side of the runway near the departure end of the runway.
The pilot further stated that there was no preimpact failure or malfunction of the engine or flight controls.
Postcrash inspection of the airplane revealed that the elevator flight control cables were binding due to the buckled floor in the cockpit area.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper flare and improper recovery from a bounced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On October 1, 1998, about 1700 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N733HK, registered to Huffman Aviation, Inc., dba Venice Flying Service, experienced a hard landing at the Venice Municipal Airport, Venice, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the private-rated pilot and one passenger were not injured.
The flight had originated about 1550 from the Venice Municipal Airport.
The pilot stated that he had performed three stop-and-go landings and after touchdown for a planned full stop landing, the airplane touched down and bounced two or three times.
During this time, the throttle was at idle and the elevator control was full aft.
He then elected to perform a go-around while on the ground and applied full power, but the airplane would not become airborne.
He then aborted the go-around and the airplane veered off the left side of the runway near the departure end of the runway.
The pilot further stated that there was no flight control or engine preimpact failure or malfunction.
Postcrash inspection of the airplane revealed that the elevator flight controls were binding due to a buckled floor in the cockpit area.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2300 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 63 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2502 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320-H2AD Registered Owner: HUFFMAN AVIATION, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
