National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: New Stuyahok, AK
Accident Number: ANC11LA007
Date & Time: 01/03/2011, 1350 AST
Registration: N9001
Aircraft: BEECH E18S-9700
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The pilot reported that the runway at the destination airport was ice-covered, and that upon touchdown the surface was slicker than he had anticipated.
He aborted the landing by applying full power to take off.
The airplane was unable to out-climb the rising terrain at the end of the runway, and it collided with terrain, sustaining substantial damage to the fuselage and both wings.
The pilot indicated that there were no mechanical issues with the airplane that precluded its normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudgment of the runway surface condition, resulting in an aborted landing and collision with rising terrain during the ensuing takeoff attempt.
The airplane was being operated by Air Supply Alaska, Inc., Kenai, Alaska, as a visual flight rules(VFR) cargo flight under Title 14, Code of Federal Regulations Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The solo airline transport pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight following was in effect.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge, dated January 6, the pilot reported that upon touching down on the ice-covered runway, he realized that the runway was slicker than anticipated.
He wrote that he applied power to abort the landing, but was unable to out-climb the rising terrain at the end of the runway.
The airplane collided with terrain, and both wings and the fuselage received substantial damage.
The pilot indicated that there were no mechanical issues with the airplane that precluded normal operation.
