National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: McKinney, TX
Accident Number: CEN11LA142
Date & Time: 01/02/2011, 0900 CST
Registration: N102PJ
Aircraft: AMERICAN LEGEND AIRCRAFT CO
AL3
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot was performing a landing when the airplane bounced several times before he lost control of the airplane.
The airplane veered to the right and departed the runway.
As the airplane continued through the grass, the right wing contacted a construction sign and impacted a ditch, coming to rest inverted.
An eyewitness reported that the tailwheel never fully contacted the ground prior to departing the runway.
No preimpact anomalies were reported by the pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's loss of directional control during landing.
The student pilot was not injured.
The airplane sustained substantial crushing damage to the right wing and vertical stabilizer.
The aircraft was registered to and operated by Shell Air LLC, Olathe, Kansas, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a local training flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan.
The local flight originated from T31 approximately 0855.
According to a statement provided by the pilot, upon landing at the airport, the airplane bounced several times before he lost control of the airplane.
The airplane veered to the right and departed the runway.
After departing the runway the airplane's right wing struck a construction sign.
The airplane then impacted a ditch and came to rest inverted.
The pilot did not report any anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident landing.
A certified flight instructor saw the landing and reported that the airplane's tailwheel did not appear to fully contact the ground prior to the airplane departing the runway.
