Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Elephant Butte, NM
Accident Number:
CEN11FA312
Date & Time:
05/01/2011, 1215 MDT 
Registration:
N89MM
Aircraft:
COMBS EARL W KITFOX SPEEDSTER
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was on a local flight from a nearby airport. Two witnesses, who were driving north 
on an interstate highway, said the airplane was flying south about 1,000 feet above the ground 
when it pitched upward, rolled to the right, and then spiraled toward the ground. The 
witnesses said that they did not see any fire or smoke before they lost sight of the airplane. 
However, they subsequently saw a plume of smoke rising from behind a hill. A postaccident 
examination of the airplane wreckage showed that the airplane impacted the terrain in a right 
bank, slightly nose low attitude, then spun around to the left. A postimpact fire consumed most 
of the airplane structure. An examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation of the airplane. A rod end for a push-
pull tube between the flap handle and the flaperon mixer unit was found failed in overload at 
the outer two threads. Although this finding indicates potential problems with the construction 
and/or maintenance of the airplane, there is no indication that it contributed to the accident. 
Forensic toxicology testing of the pilot™s liver and kidney detected Diphenhyramine; however, 
the level of Diphenhydramine was not substantive enough to be determined and its presence 
most likely did not induce impairment.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's loss of control of the airplane for reasons that could not be determined because 
postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation.
Findings
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Scheduled/routine inspection - Owner/builder
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN11FA312
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 1, 2011, about 1215 Mountain Daylight Time, a Kitfox Speedster, experimental 
amateur-built single-engine airplane, N89MM, sustained substantial damage when it impacted 
hilly terrain near Elephant Butte, New Mexico. The commercial pilot on board the airplane was 
fatally injured. The airplane was registered to the pilot and was being operated under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and a visual flight rules flight plan was not filed. The local flight originated 
from the Truth or Consequences Municipal Airport (TCS), Truth or Consequences, New 
Mexico, about 1145.
Two witnesses traveling together north on the nearby interstate highway reported seeing the 
airplane just before the accident. One witness said he saw the airplane ﬁsuddenly roll and dive 
towards the ground.ﬂ The other witness said she saw the airplane pitch up and fall over to the 
right, and then spiral toward the ground. Both witnesses stated that the airplane was traveling 
south at about 1,000 feet above the ground when the airplane suddenly pitched up. Both 
witnesses also said that they did not see any fire or smoke prior to them losing sight of the 
airplane in the terrain. They then saw a plume of smoke rising from behind a hill off the right 
side of the highway. 
 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 78, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single engine land, airplane 
single-engine sea, airplane multi-engine land and instrument airplane ratings. The pilot also 
held a flight instructor certificate with airplane single engine and instrument airplane ratings. 
In addition, the pilot held an airframe and powerplant mechanic certificate.
A review of the pilot™s logbooks showed him as having about 10,700 total flying hours. It 
showed him having successfully completing a flight review in a Piper PA-28 airplane on May 5, 
2010. The last entry found in the logbook was on August 12, 2010 where the pilot flew for one 
hour and logged 5 night takeoff and landings.
The pilot held a Second Class medical certificate dated January 24, 2011. The certificate had 
limitations that read ﬁMust wear corrective lenses for near and distant vision.ﬂ
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was an Earl W. Combs Kitfox Speedster, serial number HBS055. The airplane was 
manufactured in 1993 and was powered by a Rotax Model 912 UL engine rated at 80 
horsepower.  
According to the airplane™s aircraft logbook, a stamp entry was made on January 11, 2009, that 
stated the airplane underwent an "annual inspectionﬂ. The recorded airframe time was 470.3 
hours.  Below the annual inspection entry was a stamp entry with no date stating that the 
ﬁaircraft/engineﬂ had undergone an ﬁannual/100 hour inspectionﬂ, and had a pen entry of 
502.1 hours. There were no other entries following that entry in the logbook. The airplane™s 
engine logbook confirmed an annual condition inspection was performed on April 20, 2010.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 3 of 6CEN11FA312
At 1253, the aviation routine weather report (METAR) for TCS about 1.5 miles west of the 
accident site was wind 240 degrees at 9 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, few clouds at 9,000 
feet, temperature 57 degrees Fahrenheit (F), dew point 12 degrees F, and altimeter 29.75 inches 
of Mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage came to rest in a rugged area of mesas and ravines in Colvert Canyon 1.5 
miles east of TCS. The wreckage path covered an area approximately 20-feet wide by 115-feet 
long. The initial impact point was characterized by a descending scrape mark which containing 
green glass consistent with a navigational lens. Ground scars and the distribution of wreckage 
debris were consistent with the airplane™s right wing tip impacting the downward slopping side 
of a small mesa, followed by the impact, side load, and failure of the left main landing gear. 
Continued ground signatures suggested that the airplane then spun approximately 360 degrees 
to the left before coming to rest, twisted, with the aft fuselage in an upright position. The pilot 
was separated from the airplane and found beyond the wreckage in a ravine. The airplane was 
mostly consumed in an ensuing post-crash fire. 
The airplane wreckage was examined at the accident scene on May 2, 2011. All major 
components of the airplane were accounted for and control continuity was established to each 
major flight control with the exception of several sections of the pushrods, which were 
consumed in the post-crash fire, and a flap handle-to-flaperon mixer unit pushrod rod end, 
which was found separated. The rod end and pushrod were retained and examined by 
personnel in the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, D.C.  
The engine was separated from the airframe and examined the following day by the 
investigator-in-charge (IIC). Due to thermal damage from the postimpact fire, the engine could 
not be rotated. The engine was disassembled and control continuity was established to all 
internal components. The cylinders were examined and all cylinder domes and piston heads 
exhibited "normal" combustive deposits with no abnormal scoring of the cylinder walls noted. 
All cylinder valves were found complete and in their respective positions. The ignition system 
was thermally damaged and could not be tested. Both carburetors were thermally damaged and 
showed no traces of fuel. 
The engine was equipped with a three bladed carbon fiber propeller. The propeller hub was 
found attached to the engine crankshaft. One blade remained attached to the hub and the other 
two were found separated, but nearby. The attached blade was found in the 12:00 o™clock 
position and did not exhibit notable impact signatures; however, it was thermally damaged. 
The second blade was separated near the hub and exhibited little damage. The fracture 
signatures were consistent with the propeller being pushed in a rearward direction until the 
blade broke. The third blade was separated near the hub. The outer eight inches of the third 
blade were broken aft and was not found. The blade fracture was consistent with it having 
occurred when the airplane struck the ground. No other anomalies were found in any of the 
other airplane systems.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the State Medical Examiner for New 
Mexico at the University of New Mexico Hospital, Albuquerque, New Mexico, on May 2, 2011.
Results of toxicology testing of samples taken from the pilot detected Diphenhydramine in liver 
and kidney. Diphenhydramine is a generation one sedating antihistamine usually sold under 
Page 4 of 6CEN11FA312
the commercial name Benadryl.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The flaperon pushrod and rod end fitting were examined at the NTSB Materials Laboratory, 
Washington, D.C., on July 12, 2012. The components showed discoloration and oxidation 
consistent with exposure to fire. The pushrod was separated from the forward rod end fitting. 
The lock nut was present on the threaded end of the pushrod and rotated freely by hand on the 
threads. The threads at the forward end of the pushrod were intact. Threads in the rod end 
fitting were damaged. Closer examination of the damaged threads on the rod end fitting 
showed the final two threads adjacent to the wrench flats at the aft end of the rod were 
fractured in overload. No thread damage was observed in the remaining threads in the rod end 
fitting. An inspection hole for checking thread engagement was present in the rod end fitting 
and located approximately seven threads from the aft end of the rod end fitting. The inspection 
hole was clear across the flats, indicating that the threads for the push rod were not engaged to 
the point of the inspection hole in the aft rod end fitting.  See NTSB Materials Laboratory 
Factual Report.
According to the kit manufacturer, the Kitfox uses flaperons, a combination of the ailerons and 
flaps, to induce roll and perpetuate turns in the airplane. The different flap-function settings 
allow the airplane to fly at slower speeds without losing any controllability as in the cases for 
landing and in some takeoff situations as from a short or soft field.
History of Flight
Enroute
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (total)
Controlled flight into terr/obj (CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
79, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/24/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Page 5 of 6CEN11FA312
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
COMBS EARL W
Registration:
N89MM
Model/Series:
KITFOX SPEEDSTER 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
HBS055
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/20/2010, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
502.1 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
ROTAX
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
912UL
Registered Owner:
WOODSUM RICHARD P
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
WOODSUM RICHARD P
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TCS, 4853 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
250°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / -12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Truth or Conseq, NM (TCS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Truth or Conseq, NM (TCS)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1145 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Truth or Consequences Muni (TCS)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
4853 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6CEN11FA312
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.233889, -107.243889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy LeBaron
Adopted Date:
01/22/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Ken Hand; Federal Aviation Administration; ALBUQUERQUE, NM
Publish Date:
01/22/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78999
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
