National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MARKSVILLE, LA
Accident Number: FTW97LA335
Date & Time: 09/01/1997, 0830 CDT
Registration: N8075K
Aircraft: Grumman-Schweizer G-164B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was in the process of executing a turn to reverse direction upon completion of an aerial application pass, when the airplane stalled.
Subsequent to the loss of control, the airplane impacted the ground in a left wing low and nose down attitude and came to rest in an open pasture.
The pilot acknowledged that there was no mechanical malfunction prior to the loss of control.
The pilot stated that in the 90 days preceding the accident he had accumulated 500 hours of flight time and the fact that he was trying to do too much probably caught up with him.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadvertent stall during a turn to reverse direction during an aerial application flight.
A factor was the pilot's chronic fatigue as result of cumulative long workdays.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) FATIGUE(CHRONIC) - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Factual Information On September 1, 1997, at 0830 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G-164B agricultural airplane, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while maneuvering near Marksville, Louisiana.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight for which a flight plan was not filed.
The airplane departed from an airstrip near Vick, Louisiana, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.
According to the FAA inspector who traveled to the accident site, the pilot was in the process of executing a turn to reverse direction upon completion of an aerial application pass, when the airplane stalled.
Subsequent to the loss of control, the airplane impacted the ground in a left wing low and nose down attitude and came to rest in an open pasture.
Examination of the wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that both top wings and the main landing gear assembly incurred sustained structural damage.
In the enclosed pilot/operator report, the pilot acknowledged that there was no mechanical malfunction prior to the loss of control.
In the same document the pilot reported that in the 90 days preceding the accident, he had accumulated 500 hours of flight time.
In a telephonic interview conducted by the investigator in charge, the pilot stated that the accident occurred during the first flight of the day.
He added that in the morning of the accident "he felt refreshed and alert following a good night's sleep."
He further stated that "his work days for the previous 4 to 5 months had been long, normally working long days from sunrise to sunset" spraying the rice and cotton crops, as well as the boll weevil infestation.
The pilot further stated that "the fact that he was trying to do too much probably caught up with him" since he had gone from one contract to the other without rest.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: , Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
