National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KING SALMON, AK
Accident Number: ANC97LA140
Date & Time: 09/01/1997, 1710 AKD
Registration: N7032Q
Aircraft: Cessna U206F
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The pilot aborted the first takeoff attempt in the seaplane when the pilot seat slipped aft.
He did not back taxi the seaplane prior to beginning the second takeoff run.
A passenger's video depicts the seaplane on the step, a passenger commenting on the shallow water, and the seaplane striking a sandbar located in the middle of the river.
The seaplane came to rest inverted in shallow water.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's selection of an unsuitable takeoff area.
Factors were the sand bar and the pilot's failure to use all available waterway for the takeoff.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SAND BAR 2.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The airline transport certificated pilot and two passengers were uninjured.
The airplane was operated by Hartley, Inc., doing business as Branch River Air Service, of Anchorage, Alaska.
The flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 135 as an on demand air taxi.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and a company flight plan was filed.
Statements and a videotape taken by the passengers revealed that during the initial takeoff run, while on step, the pilot's seat slipped aft and he aborted the takeoff.
He reset his seat, and did not water taxi the seaplane back to the original takeoff spot.
The video depicts the seaplane beginning a second takeoff run, and the passengers can be heard commenting on the shallowness of the water.
The seaplane then strikes a sandbar and noses over.
This tape and overhead photographs show the seaplane inverted on a sandbar in shallow water.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 15 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 8556 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, activated, aided in locating accident Engine Model/Series: IO-520-F Registered Owner: HARTLEY, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
