National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MURFREESBORO, TN
Accident Number: ATL97LA130
Date & Time: 09/01/1997, 1540 CDT
Registration: N437CG
Aircraft: Beech 95-A55
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot stated to the inspector that upon landing at 110 knots airspeed he was unable to stop when full brakes were applied before departing the end of the wet runway.
A witness stated that he saw the airplane land about halfway down the runway very fast.
The witness, at the accident site, stated that he saw the airplane 'well high on the final approach glidepath', and that the airplane landed 'very  fast' and touched down ' about mid field'.
The FAA inspector stated, that after the airplane departed the end of the wet runway,  it rolled down an embankment collapsing the nose gear and damaging the inboard structure of the left wing ribs, and the nose gear bulkhead on the right side.
The flight manual for the Beech 95-A55 states the normal approach speed for this airplane is 87knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's excessive airspeed, and improper touch down point during landing, that resulted in the runway end overun.
Factors were the wet runway surface, and the embankment at the end of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - WET ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DROP-OFF/DESCENDING EMBANKMENT Factual Information On September 1, 1997, about 1540 central daylight time, a Beech 95-A55, N437CG, sustained substantial damage when it ran off the departure end of runway 36 during landing at Murfreesboro Municipal Airport, Murfreesboro, Tennessee.
The airplane was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan was filed for this business flight.
The private pilot and two passengers were not injured.
The flight originated from Destin, Florida at 1245, on the same day.
The pilot stated to the inspector that upon landing at 110 knots airspeed, he was unable to stop, when full brakes were applied, before departing the end of the wet runway.
A witness, at the accident site, stated that he saw the airplane "well high on the final approach glidepath", and that the airplane landed "very fast" and touched down " about mid field".
The FAA inspector stated, that after the airplane departed the end of the wet runway, it rolled down an embankment collapsing the nose gear, damaging the inboard structure of the left wing ribs, and the nose gear bulk head on the right side.
The inspector found skid marks on the runway, and no mechanical or system malfunctions were identified during the wreckage examination.
Runway 36 was 3800 feet in length and made of asphalt.
The runway conditions for that day were 84 degrees Fahrenheit and light rain.
According to the pilots operating handbook for the Beech 95-A55, the estimated landing roll for this airplane, at 84 degree Fahrenheit temperature, normal approach speed of 87 knots, and under dry conditions would be 1,650 ft.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
