Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Anaktuvuk Pass, AK
Accident Number:
ANC16LA012
Date & Time:
01/02/2016, 1205 AKS 
Registration:
N540ME
Aircraft:
CESSNA 208B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Controlled flight into terr/obj 
(CFIT)
Injuries:
5 Serious, 3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot was conducting a scheduled passenger flight in an area of remote, 
snow-covered, mountainous terrain with seven passengers on board. The pilot reported that, 
after receiving a weather briefing, he chose to conduct the flight under visual flight rules (VFR). 
While en route about 10,000 ft mean sea level (msl), the visibility began "getting fuzzy." The 
pilot then descended the airplane to 2,500 ft msl (500 ft above ground level) to fly along a 
river. When the airplane was about 10 miles southwest of the airport, he climbed the airplane 
to about 3,000 ft msl in order to conduct a straight-in approach to the runway. He added that 
the visibility was again a little "fuzzy" due to snow and clouds, and that he never saw the 
airport. The pilot also noted that the flat light conditions limited his ability to determine his 
distance from the surrounding mountainous, snow-covered terrain. Shortly after climbing to 
3,000 ft msl, the airplane collided with the rising terrain about 6 miles southwest of the 
airport. Another pilot, who had just departed from the airport, confirmed that flat light and 
low-visibility conditions existed in the area at the time of the accident. Further, camera images 
of the weather conditions recorded at the airport showed that, although conditions were 
marginal VFR at the surface at the time of the accident, there was mountain obscuration and 
reduced visibility due to light snow and clouds along the accident flight path and that the worst 
conditions were located along and near the higher terrain. 
The pilot reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that 
would have precluded normal operation. It is likely that that the pilot encountered flat light 
and low-visibility conditions as he neared the airport at 3,000 ft msl while operating under 
VFR and that he did not see the rising, snow-covered mountainous terrain and subsequently 
failed to maintain clearance from it.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 9ANC16LA012
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's continued flight into deteriorating, flat light weather conditions, which resulted in 
impact with mountainous, snow-covered terrain. 
Findings
Aircraft
Heading/course - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Flat light - Effect on personnel (Cause)
Flat light - Decision related to condition (Cause)
Page 3 of 9ANC16LA012
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute
Controlled flight into terr/obj (CFIT) (Defining event)
On January 2, 2016, about 1205 Alaska standard time, a single-engine, turbine-powered 
Cessna 208B airplane, N540ME, impacted mountainous, snow-covered terrain about 6 miles 
southwest of Anaktuvuk Pass Airport, Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska. The airline transport pilot and 
four passengers sustained serious injuries, and three passengers sustained minor injuries. The 
airplane sustained substantial damage. The airplane was being operated by Wright Air Service, 
Inc., Fairbanks, Alaska, as a 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 135 visual flight rules (VFR) 
scheduled commuter flight. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) existed at the Anaktuvuk 
Pass Airport at the time of the accident, and company flight-following procedures were in 
effect. The flight departed from Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, Alaska, about 1030 
destined for Anaktuvuk Pass. The area between Fairbanks and Anaktuvuk Pass consists of 
remote, steep mountainous terrain, which is snow-covered in January. 
Following the accident, the pilot stated that, after receiving a weather briefing in the morning 
from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Flight Service Center, he chose to conduct the 
flight under VFR. He reported that, while en route to Anaktuvuk Pass about 10,000 ft mean sea 
level (msl), the visibility began "getting fuzzy" as he flew over the Caribou Hills. He then 
descended to 2,500 ft msl (or 500 ft above ground level) to fly along the John River. When the 
airplane was about 10 miles southwest of Anaktuvuk Pass, he climbed to about 3,000 ft msl to 
be at the published airport traffic pattern altitude while maintaining a flight track on the east 
side of the river valley to conduct a straight-in approach to runway 2. He added that the 
visibility was again a little "fuzzy"; that there was snow, white walls, and white clouds; and that 
he never saw the airport. The pilot noted that the flat light conditions limited his ability to 
determine his distance from the surrounding snow-covered, mountainous terrain. Shortly after 
climbing to 3,000 ft msl, the airplane collided with the rising snow-covered terrain about 6 
miles southwest of the Anaktuvuk Pass Airport. The pilot stated that he did not remember any 
ground proximity warning system alerts before the collision. In a subsequent written 
statement, the pilot reported no preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the 
airframe or engine that would have precluded normal operation.
The airplane's Spidertracks flight tracking system transmitted flight tracking data every 2 
minutes. A review of the data revealed that the airplane's last reported location was along the 
east side of the John River valley at an altitude of 2,560 ft msl on a ground track of about 48°.
Immediately following the accident, a passenger used a cell phone to call for rescue from 
Anaktuvuk Pass residents. About 20 minutes later, rescue personnel located the airplane and 
began extricating passengers from the wreckage and transporting them via snow machine to 
Anaktuvuk Pass for medical attention.
Page 4 of 9ANC16LA012
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
5-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/21/2015
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 8854 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4142 hours (Total, this make and model), 7520 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 287 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 99 hours (Last 30 
days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
The pilot, age 57, held an airline transport pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land and 
multiengine land ratings. The pilot was issued a first-class airman medical certificate on 
October 1, 2015 with the limitation that he must have available glasses for near vision.
The accident pilot completed CFIT avoidance training on May 26, 2015. On November 21, 2015 
the pilot successfully completed an airman competency and proficiency check in accordance 
with 14 CFR 135.293 and 135.297 which included CFIT avoidance.
Page 5 of 9ANC16LA012
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N540ME
Model/Series:
208B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1996
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
208B-0540
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/09/2015, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7449 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
19555.4 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W CANADA
ELT:
C126 installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-6 SERIES
Registered Owner:
WRIGHT AIR SERVICE INC
Rated Power:
675 hp
Operator:
WRIGHT AIR SERVICE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Commuter Air Carrier 
(135); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
HYTA
The accident airplane, a Cessna 208B, N540ME, was manufactured in 1996. At the time of the 
last inspection on December 9, 2015, the airplane had logged a total time in service of 19,555.4 
flight hours. 
The airplane was equipped with a Pratt & Whitney Canada PT6A-114A, 675 shaft horse power 
turbine engine. The engine had a total time in service of 8,915.4 hours, of which 3,542.4 hours 
were since the last overhaul.
The airplane was equipped with a Terrain Awareness Warning System (TAWS). The pilot did 
not recall inhibiting the system, which required navigation through several data pages within 
the GPS unit. The airplane was not equipped with a remote inhibit switch and due to system 
design and a lack of non-volatile memory, the status of the system could not be determined 
post-accident.
Page 6 of 9ANC16LA012
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PAKP, 2100 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2136 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
28°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3400 ft agl
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 4300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Light
Altimeter Setting:
29.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-7°C / -11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
FAIRBANKS, AK (FAI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
ANAKTUVUK PASS, AK 
(AKP)
Type of Clearance:
Traffic Advisory; VFR
Departure Time:
1030 AKS
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
The closest weather reporting facility was Anaktuvuk Pass Airport, located about 6 miles 
northeast of the accident site. At 1156, a METAR was reporting, in part, wind from 170° at 5 
knots; sky condition, broken clouds at 4,400 ft, overcast at 5,000 ft; visibility 6 statute miles; 
temperature 19°F, dew point 12°F; and altimeter setting 29.03 inches of mercury. 
The FAA maintained weather cameras at Anaktuvuk Pass, which recorded images to the 
northeast, southeast, south, and southwest; the site elevation was 2,171 ft msl. A review of the 
recorded images revealed deteriorating weather conditions about the time of the accident. The 
south-facing camera showed that, between 1152 and 1212, the visibility was less than 2 miles, 
that ceiling conditions were below 4,100 ft msl, and that snow was falling. Weather conditions 
improved slightly by 1222 with visibility greater than 2 miles but less than 4 miles and a broken 
cloud ceiling. Overall, the camera images showed that, although conditions were marginal VFR 
at the surface at the time of the accident, there was mountain obscuration and reduced 
visibility due to light snow and clouds along the accident flightpath and that the worst 
conditions existed along and near the higher terrain at the time of the accident. The pilot 
reported that he did not check the FAA weather cameras before departure because it was dark 
at Anaktuvuk Pass at the time of departure.
Another pilot who had just departed from Anaktuvuk Pass reported that he contacted the 
accident pilot as he was approaching the airport and stated that the weather was "pretty much 
as advertised." The other pilot added that he had encountered flat light conditions after 
departing Anaktuvuk Pass, which was "compounded by low visibility," and that, to remain in 
VMC, he had to turn toward the north side of the valley and initiate a climb. The pilot stated 
that he perceived that the flat light and low-visibility conditions were highly localized.
Page 7 of 9ANC16LA012
Airport Information
Airport:
ANAKTUVUK PASS (AKP)
Runway Surface Type:
Gravel
Airport Elevation:
2106 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Ice; Snow
Runway Used:
02
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4800 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Valley/Terrain 
Following; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
4 Serious, 3 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
5 Serious, 3 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
68.078333, -151.896389 (est)
On January 3, two FAA aviation safety inspectors traveled to Anaktuvuk Pass and reached the 
accident site that morning. The inspectors reported that the main wreckage was in an open 
area of snow-covered tundra at an elevation of about 2,500 ft msl. The top of the ridge where 
the airplane impacted was at an elevation of about 3,000 ft msl. From the initial point of 
impact, the airplane slid downhill about 300 ft and then came to rest in an upright position. 
The FAA inspectors reported finding a 1/2-inch layer of ice on the nonprotected, leading edge 
surfaces of the tail structure and outside air temperature probe. However, no ice was present 
on the areas protected by the inflatable deice boots. 
The airplane wreckage was further examined by the NTSB IIC, two Textron Aviation air safety 
investigators, and a representative from the operator. The examination revealed that the 
airplane had sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and empennage. Flight 
control primary and secondary cable continuities were established from the cockpit controls to 
the respective flight control bell cranks and trim surface actuators. The flight control surfaces 
remained attached to the airplane except for the left aileron, which was separated outboard of 
the inboard hinge. The left aileron control rod was separated. The separated left aileron was 
observed during the initial on-scene examination, but due to recent snowfall, the remaining 
portion of aileron was not recovered with the airplane wreckage. The pitch trim actuator 
extensions were altered at the accident site to facilitate recovery. The aileron trim actuator was 
found in the "neutral" position. The flap actuator screw jack extension indicated that the flaps 
were retracted. The engine had separated from the firewall at the attachment points. 
Rotational scarring at the propeller hub attachment points were consistent with the engine 
operating at the time of impact.
Page 8 of 9ANC16LA012
The examination revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or anomalies with the 
airplane or engine that would have precluded normal operation. 
Flight Recorders
The accident airplane was not equipped, nor was it required to be equipped with, a cockpit 
voice recorder or a flight data recorder.
Medical And Pathological Information
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed toxicological testing on specimens from 
the pilot on February 12, 2016 which was negative for ethanol and drugs.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Medallion Foundation
According to the Medallion Foundation Shield Program website, the purpose of the Shield 
Program was to create and maintain a higher level of safety through the use of system safety 
and safety management system principles. An applicant needed to earn a "star" in each of the 
following categories to earn a shield:

Controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) avoidance

Operational control

Maintenance and ground service

Safety

Internal evaluation
To earn a star, an applicant organization had to complete specific training classes, 
produce a required manual, and undergo an external audit to determine if the company 
had incorporated the information into its corporate culture. Following the initial audit, 
annual independent audits were to be conducted.
According to the Medallion website, the benefits of being a Shield carrier "include 
reduced insurance rates, cross promotional marketing of Shield carriers and recognition 
by DOD [Department of Defense], OGP [Oil and Gas Producers] and the FAA as an 
operator who incorporates higher standards of safety than required by regulations."
Page 9 of 9ANC16LA012
At the time of the accident, Wright Air Service was the holder of a CFIT avoidance 
"star." 
Flat Light Conditions
In the FAA publication titled, "Flying in Flat Light and White Out Conditions," flat light is 
defined
 
as an optical illusion that causes pilots to lose their depth perception and contrast in 
vision. It states that flat light can completely obscure features of the terrain, creating an 
inability to distinguish distances and closure rates.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David S Williams
Adopted Date:
08/28/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Clark Miller; FAA; Fairbanks, AK
Publish Date:
08/28/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92514
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
