The flight instructor reported that, after takeoff, when the airplane was about 500 ft above 
ground level, the engine started to run roughly and lose power. The engine rpm decreased to 
about 1,100 rpm as the flight instructor attempted to turn the airplane 180 degrees back 
toward the airport. However, he was unable to land at the airport, so he made a forced landing 
to a field short of the runway. 
During a postaccident engine test run, the engine initially ran roughly, and black smoke was 
observed coming from the exhaust. After a brief warmup, the engine could only produce about 
1,600 rpm at full throttle, and the engine test run was stopped. The examination of the No. 3 
cylinder revealed that the exhaust valve was broken in several pieces and that some fragments 
remained in the cylinder, which produced gouging and scraping to the piston and cylinder 
head. The broken exhaust valve, spring, exhaust valve keepers, and rotating cap exhibited 
carbon buildup. Examination revealed a wear pattern on the top of the No. 3 cylinder exhaust 
valve rotator cap consistent with rocker arm wear. No rotational signatures were observed 
along the edge of the cap near the heavy carbon buildup, indicating that the rotator cap had 
stopped rotating, which subsequently led to a hot spot on the exhaust valve and caused the 
valve to fail.   
The partial loss of engine power due to the failure of the exhaust valve. 
On July 2, 2014, about 0842 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-140, N9898W, sustained 
substantial damage during a forced landing after a loss of engine power during takeoff at the 
Granbury Regional Airport (GDJ), Granbury, Texas. The flight instructor and passenger were 
not injured. The airplane was registered to Thunderbolt Aviation LLC and operated by Iron 
Compass Aviation under the provisions of the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an 
instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and 
a visual flight rules flight plan was filed. The airplane was departing GDJ and was en route to 
the Waco Regional Airport (ACT), Waco, Texas.
The flight instructor reported that the airplane was about 500 feet above ground level when the 
engine started to run rough along with a loss of engine power. The engine rpm decreased to 
about 1,100 rpm as the flight instructor attempted to complete a 180-degree turn back to the 
airport. However, he was unable to land on the airport, so he completed a forced landing to a 
field short of the runway. The airplane's right wing hit a tree during the landing roll, which 
resulted in substantial damage to the wing. 
The on-site examination of the airplane by Federal Aviation Administration inspectors revealed 
that there appeared to be no damage to the engine and no apparent reason for the loss of 
engine power. The airplane wreckage was transported to an aircraft storage facility for further 
examination and an engine run.
An engine run was conducted using an external fuel supply. After priming the fuel system with 
the electric fuel pump, the engine was started. The engine sounded like it was running rough, 
and some black smoke could be seen from the exhaust. After a brief warm up, the engine would 
not operate more than about 1,600 rpm at full throttle. The engine run was stopped and a 
compression check was performed. The No. 3 cylinder did not have any compression. The 
examination of the No. 3 cylinder revealed that the exhaust valve was broken in several pieces 
and some fragments remained in the cylinder. The broken exhaust valve, spring, exhaust valve 
keepers, and rotator cap all exhibited carbon build-up. The piston and cylinder head exhibited 
gouging and scraping consistent with secondary damage from the fragments. The examination 
of the No. 3 cylinder exhaust valve rotator cap revealed that it had a wear pattern on the top of 
the cap that was consistent with rocker arm wear, and no rotational signatures along the edge 
of the cap where there was heavy carbon build-up. 
The engine was a 150-horsepower Lycoming O-320-E2A. The last annual maintenance 
inspection was conducted on June 2, 2014, with at total aircraft time of 3,464 hours. At the 
time of the accident, the engine had about 2,040 hours since the last overhaul. The airplane 
had flown about 46 hours since the annual/100-hour maintenance inspection. The 
recommended time between overhauls (TBO) is 2,000 hours, but it is not a mandatory 
requirement under Part 91 regulations.
