During an aerial application flight, the pilot initiated a low-level right turn to reverse course. A 
witness saw the airplane's bank angle increase to vertical, and the airplane subsequently 
descended into the ground. Examination of the accident site indicated a relatively straight-line 
impact path with the airplane's right wing tip hitting first followed by the nose. Examination of 
the wreckage revealed no preexisting mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation; the engine was under power at impact, and the propeller was in the normal 
operating (not feathered) range. In addition, an autopsy of the pilot did not note any pertinent 
preexisting medical conditions. The airplane's high angle-of-bank turn, its subsequent descent 
to ground impact, and the resultant wreckage path were consistent with an accelerated stall. 
 
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during a low-level, high angle-of-bank turn, 
which resulted in an exceedance of the critical angle of attack and a subsequent accelerated 
stall. 
 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 2014, about 1730 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-602, N91331, operated by 
Shannon Agricultural Flying, Inc., was destroyed when it impacted a bean field in Clarksdale, 
Mississippi. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and the airplane, which departed Shannon Field (02CD), Clarksdale, Mississippi, 
was not operating on a flight plan. The local aerial application flight was conducted under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137.
According to company personnel and onboard GPS data, the airplane was applying fertilizer in 
both directions in an east-west race track pattern. After completing each leg, the airplane 
would make a 20- to 30-degree left turn, followed by a right turn to reverse course and fly the 
next track. The GPS track indicated that the airplane was on its fourth circuit, with the data 
ending prior to the final turn.
A witness on his lawn mower noticed the airplane when it flew over his property about 150 feet 
above the ground. He heard the airplane's engine running over the sound of the mower, and 
saw the airplane turn right, to the north, and the wings go vertical. The airplane then impacted 
the ground, and when it did, the witness saw smoke and fertilizer being ejected upwards. The 
witness then went to the wreckage and found the pilot unresponsive.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot, age 58, held commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land rating. 
His latest FAA second class medical certificate was issued February 27, 2014. The latest flight 
time logged by the pilot indicated 12,051 hours of flight time with 4,358 hours in airplane make 
and model.
A calendar with recorded Hobbs times for each flight was found in the wreckage. For the day 
preceding the accident, the pilot logged five events for a total of 8.2 hours of airplane 
operation. On the day of the accident, prior to the accident flight, the pilot logged six events for 
a total of 6.3 hours of airplane operation. The Hobbs meter after the accident flight indicated 
an additional 0.3 hours.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The low-wing, conventional landing gear (tail dragger) agricultural application airplane was 
powered by a Pratt and Whitney Canada PT6A-60AG engine driving a Hartzell five-bladed, 
hydraulically operated, constant speed propeller with feathering and reversing capabilities. Oil 
pressure from the propeller governor was used to move the blades to the low pitch direction. 
Blade-mounted counterweights and feathering springs would have actuated the blades towards 
the high pitch direction in the absence of governor oil pressure. The propeller incorporated a 
Beta mechanism that actuated when blade angles were lower than the flight idle position. The 
blades were of aluminum construction, and the hub and blade clamps were steel. Propeller 
rotation was clockwise as viewed from the rear.
The airplane's latest annual inspection was recorded on November 25, 2013, at 5,200 hours of 
operating time.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather, recorded at an airport about 10 nautical miles to the north, at 1735, included clear 
skies, wind form 200 degrees true at 9 knots, temperature 32 degrees C, dew point 24 degrees 
true, altimeter setting 29.90 inches Hg.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The initial impact occurred on flat terrain in the vicinity of 34 degrees north, 06.34 minutes 
north latitude, 090 degrees, 34.26 minutes west longitude, at an elevation of about 160 feet. 
The wreckage path, which began with green lens material, included airplane parts centered 
along an almost straight line, about 360 degrees magnetic. Approximately 75 feet beyond the 
initial impact point, there was a 3-foot-deep, 10-foot-long crater with the propeller hub and 
four of the five propeller blades partially embedded at its right edge. Beginning about 20 feet 
beyond the crater was the fifth propeller blade and the rest of the airplane.
The airplane was fractured into multiple sections and pieces, with all flight control surfaces 
located at the scene. The cockpit and rollover structure were intact. Flight control continuity 
was confirmed via the control cables from the cockpit to the rudder and elevator, and through 
push rod and bellcrank fractures to the ailerons.
After the airplane's removal to a storage facility, the engine was partially disassembled. Soil 
was found in the gas generator case and throughout the combustion section. The compressor 
turbine blade tips exhibited smearing and the turbine shroud exhibited corresponding 
circumferential rubbing. The compressor disc outer rim exhibited circumferential rubbing with 
frictional heat discoloration and material in the vicinity of the 1st stage power turbine vane ring 
and baffle. The findings were all consistent with the engine being under power at impact.
Of the five propeller blades, Nos. 1 through 3 remained attached to the hub via the clamps, and 
Nos. 4 and 5 were fractured off the hub. The latter two blades left witness marks on the hub. 
Those two marks and a cylinder-to-piston contact mark were consistent with propeller pitch 
being in the normal operating range and not feathered upon ground impact.
MEDICAL AND PATHLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was conducted at the Mississippi State Medical Examiner's Office, 
Jackson Mississippi, where cause of death was reported as "multiple blunt force injuries." 
Toxicological testing was conducted by the FAA, Forensic Toxicology
Research Team, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, with no anomalies noted.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to FAA-H-8083-25, "Pilot's Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge," Chapter 3, "The 
stalling speed of an airplane is higher in a level turn than in straight-and-level flight. This is 
because centrifugal force is added to the airplane's weight, and the wing must produce 
sufficient additional lift to counterbalance the load imposed by the combination of centrifugal 
force and weight. In a turn, the necessary additional lift is acquired by applying back pressure 
to the elevator control. This increases the wing's angle of attack, and results in increased lift. 
The angle of attack must increase as angle of bank increases to counteract the increasing load 
caused by centrifugal force. If at any time during the turn the attack of attack becomes 
excessive, the airplane will stall."
The Handbook further notes: "At the point of stall when the upward force of the wing's lift and 
the downward tail force cease, an unbalanced condition exists. This allows the airplane to pitch 
down abruptly, rotating about its center of gravity."
According to FAA-H-8083-3a, "Airplane Flying Handbook," Chapter 4, "At the same gross 
weight, airplane configuration, and power setting, a given airplane will consistently stall at the 
same indicated airspeed if no acceleration is involved. The airplane will, however, stall at a 
higher indicated airspeed when excessive maneuvering loads are imposed by steep turns, pull-
ups, or other abrupt changes in its flight path. Stalls entered from such flight situations are 
called "accelerated maneuver stalls, a term, which has no reference to the airspeeds involved."
In addition, "Stalls which result from abrupt maneuvers tend to be more rapid, or severe, than 
the unaccelerated stalls, and because they occur at higher-than-normal airspeeds,
and/or may occur at lower than anticipated pitch attitudes, they may be unexpected."
