The pilot stated that the accident occurred as he was completing a touch-and-go landing 
following a cross-country flight. He reported that, after an uneventful landing and during the 
subsequent initial climb, the engine ﬁgrumbledﬂ and began to ﬁcut in and out.ﬂ The pilot 
immediately told the airport tower controller that the airplane had an engine issue, reduced 
engine power, and fully extended the wing flaps for landing on the remaining runway. During 
the landing roll, the airplane overran the end of the runway before it collided with a light pole 
associated with the runway approach lighting system. Following the accident, the pilot was able 
to taxi the airplane back onto the runway, under normal engine power, before he shut down the 
engine on a nearby taxiway.
A postaccident examination established that the fuel system contained about 42 gallons of 
aviation fuel that was evenly distributed between the two wing fuel tanks. The engine was 
started by following the normal checklist procedure, and it developed takeoff power during an 
operational test run. No hesitation or engine roughness was experienced during the 
operational test run, and the engine responded to corresponding throttle movements 
throughout the test run. Thus, the postaccident operational test run did not reveal any 
anomalies with the fuel-injected engine that would have prevented normal operation. The 
reason for the partial loss of engine power could not be determined.
The partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because an 
operational test run of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation.
On July 1, 2014, about 1726 central daylight time, a Cessna model 172R airplane, N468CM, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing at the Joplin Regional Airport (JLN), Joplin, 
Missouri. The private pilot was not injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
University of Central Missouri under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
without a flight plan. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the instructional cross-
country flight that departed from Downtown Airport (3DW), Springfield, Missouri, about 1700.
The pilot reported that he was cleared for the option landing on runway 31 (6,501 feet by 150 
feet, asphalt) and that the prevailing wind was aligned with the runway heading at 11 knots. 
The pilot stated that he performed a touch-and-go landing. He reported that he made an 
uneventful landing and that shortly after the following takeoff, during initial climb, the engine 
"grumbled" and began to "cut in and out." The pilot immediately told the tower controller that 
the airplane had an engine issue, reduced engine power, and fully extended the wing flaps for a 
landing on the remaining runway. During the landing roll, the airplane overran the end of the 
runway before it collided with a light pole associated with the runway approach lighting 
system. Following the accident, the pilot was able to taxi back onto runway, under normal 
engine power, before he shut down the engine on a nearby taxiway. The right wing was 
substantially damaged during the on-ground collision with the light pole.
A postaccident examination was completed by the airplane operator's chief pilot and the 
director of maintenance. Their examination established that the airplane fuel system contained 
about 42 gallons of 100 low-lead aviation fuel that was evenly distributed between the two wing 
fuel tanks. An external examination of the engine did not reveal any anomalies or fluid leaks. 
The oil quantity dip-stick established that the engine contained about 8 quarts of oil. The 
engine was started by following the normal checklist procedure, and then demonstrated the 
ability to develop takeoff power during an operational test run. No hesitation or engine 
roughness was experienced during the operational test run. The engine responded to 
corresponding throttle movements throughout the test run. A functional magneto check did 
not reveal any anomalies with engine operation. Following the operational test run, there were 
no fluid leaks observed on the engine exterior. The postaccident operational test run did not 
reveal any anomalies with the engine, a fuel-injected Lycoming model IO-360, that would have 
prevented normal operation.
