The student pilot had installed a smaller, higher performance wing on the weight-shift control 
trike just before the accident flight. A witness reported seeing the trike in a descending spiral 
about 1 hour after it had taken off. The trike impacted terrain in a field along the final approach 
course for the airstrip at the departure airport. 
The installation of the smaller wing increased the stall speed of the trike. It is likely that the 
student did not account for this increase as he slowed the trike in preparation to land, which 
resulted in an inadvertent stall from which he did not recover. There were no records located 
during the investigation to determine the pilot's experience in this or any other aircraft. A 
postaccident examination of the airframe, wing, and engine did not reveal any preimpact 
failure or malfunction. 
Toxicology testing revealed that the pilot had recently used tramadol and amphetamine, but 
there was insufficient evidence to determine whether the drugs contributed to the cause of the 
accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed to compensate for a newly installed wing, 
which resulted in the aircraft stalling and the subsequent loss of control.
On July 2, 2014, at 1900 central daylight time, N2725T, a weight-shift-control experimental 
North Wing Design Apache Sport aircraft, experienced a loss of control and collided with the 
terrain in Omro, Wisconsin. The student pilot was fatally injured and the aircraft was 
substantially damaged. The aircraft was registered to the pilot and was operated as a 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. The flight originated about 1800 from Wilke Field, a private airstrip, in 
Omro, Wisconsin.
A witness stated to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that he saw the aircraft 
in a descending spiral which continued until impact with the terrain.
Personnel Information
The pilot held a student pilot certificate that was issued on May 26, 2011. The pilot did not 
hold, nor had he ever been issued, a FAA medical certificate. A pilot logbook was not located 
during the investigation; therefore, the pilot's flight experience could not be determined.
Aircraft Information
The aircraft was a North Wing Apache Sport, serial number Mustang II 17.M Wing #5412. It 
was an experimental light sport, weight-shift control aircraft, with tricycle landing gear and a 
braced fabric wing. The two-place tandem cockpit frame is constructed of welded steel framing 
with a fiberglass cockpit fairing encompassing the frame. The aircraft was equipped with a 
ballistic recovery chute (BRS).
The aircraft was originally configured with a 17M wing. The pilot reportedly installed a high 
performance wing just prior to the accident flight. The accident occurred during the first flight 
after the installation. The new wing was about 1/3 smaller in size than the original wing. Both 
the cruise speed and the stall speeds were increased with the installation of the new wing.
The aircraft was powered by a 65 horsepower Rotax 582E engine that was installed in a pusher 
configuration.
The pilot purchased the aircraft in May 2011. FAA records show that the aircraft registration 
number (N-number) was canceled in November 2012 because the pilot failed to register the 
aircraft. The pilot subsequently registered the aircraft and the N-number was reinstated in May 
2013.
Aircraft and engine logbooks were not located during the investigation.
Meteorological Information
The closest weather reporting station was located at the Wittman Regional Airport (OSH), 
Oshkosh, Wisconsin about 12 miles southeast of the accident location. The weather recorded at 
1853 was: Wind calm; visibility 10 miles or greater; overcast ceiling at 12, 000 feet above 
ground level; temperature 18 degrees Celsius; dew point 11 degrees Celsius; altimeter 29.92 
inches-of-mercury.
Wreckage and Impact Information
The FAA conducted the on-scene investigation. The aircraft impacted an open field about ¾ 
mile west of the departure airport. The accident location was aligned with the final approach 
for runway 09 at Wilke Field. The aircraft damage was consistent of the aircraft impacting the 
terrain in a nose down attitude with a counterclockwise rotation. The debris field was 
contained in one area. The BRS had not been deployed. An examination of the tubular cockpit 
and wing frame did not reveal any evidence of a preimpact failure of the structure.
The propeller was free to turn by hand. Fuel was found in one carburetor. The second 
carburetor did not contain fuel. There was a strong odor of fuel in area around the wreckage. 
An examination of the engine did not reveal any preimpact failure/malfunction.
All three propeller blades were uniformly broken off and they were located about 20 feet from 
the main wreckage.
Medical and Pathological Information
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Fond du Lac County Medical Examiner's Office, 
Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, on July 3, 2014. The pilot's death was attributed to multiple blunt 
force injuries sustained as a result of the accident.
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared for the pilot by the FAA Civil 
Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The toxicology results were:
6.057 (ug/mL, ug/g) Amphetamine detected in Urine
0.265 (ug/mL, ug/g) Amphetamine detected in Liver
0.27 (ug/mL, ug/g) Amphetamine detected in Spinal Fluid
0.197 (ug/mL, ug/g) Amphetamine detected in Blood (Cavity)
0.841 (ug/ml, ug/g) O-Desmethyltramadol detected in Liver
0.127 (ug/ml, ug/g) O-Desmethyltramadol detected in Blood (Cavity)
3.432 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tramadol detected in Liver
0.779 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tramadol detected in Blood (Cavity)
According to the brother, the pilot had a history of drug addiction problems and the pilot 
suffered from headaches. A prescription bottle of pills was found at the pilot's residence which 
was labeled as being Tramadol hcl 50 mg.
According to the NTSB medical officer, Tramadol is a centrally acting sedating opioid analgesic 
used to treat moderate to severe pain. The Federal Drug Administration has scheduled 
Tramadol as a controlled substance (Schedule IV) as it has some potential for abuse. Tramadol 
may impair one's mental and/or physical ability required for the performance of potentially 
hazardous tasks.
Amphetamine is used for the treatment of narcolepsy and attention deficit disorder with 
hyperactivity. At levels consistent with abuse, it may also heighten alertness and concentration, 
but can cause euphoria and overconfidence in one's skills.
