Prior to turning final, the pilot completed the before landing checks.  While on final approach 
to runway 04, the engine "sputtered a little."   There was a strong right crosswind so the pilot 
crabbed the airplane into the wind.  Prior to landing, the pilot aligned the airplane with the 
runway, and the wind began pushing the airplane to the left.  The pilot initiated a go-around by 
applying full throttle and turning off the carburetor heat; however, the engine began to 
"sputter."  Subsequently, the airplane landed "hard" on its left main landing gear, bounced 
several times, veered left, and exited the runway onto the grass.  While on the grass, the 
airplane porpoised several times collapsing the nose landing gear.  The airplane came to rest on 
its nose.  At the time of the accident, the wind was from 140 degrees at 14 knots gusting to 19 
knots.
the pilot's inadequate compensation for the crosswind, which resulted in a hard landing.  A 
contributing factor was the crosswind.
On June 2, 2001, at 1350 central daylight time, a Piper PA-38-112 (Tomahawk) single-engine 
airplane, N2495C, was substantially damaged during a hard landing at the Amarillo 
International Airport, Amarillo, Texas.  The airplane was registered to Panther Aviation, Inc. 
and operated by Cleburne Aviation Services, both of Cleburne, Texas.  The private pilot, sole 
occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight plan was filed and activated for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
personal flight.  The cross-country flight originated from Cleburne, Texas, at 1040.
The pilot reported to the NTSB investigator-in-charge that prior to turning final, he completed 
the before landing checks.  While on final approach to runway 04, the engine "sputtered a little, 
like losing a magneto, carburetor icing, or fouled spark plugs."  There was a strong right 
crosswind so he crabbed the airplane into the wind.  Prior to landing, he aligned the airplane 
with the runway, and the wind began pushing the airplane to the left.  The pilot initiated a go-
around by applying full throttle and turning off the carburetor heat; however, the engine began 
to "sputter."  Subsequently, the airplane landed "hard" on its left main landing gear, bounced 
several times, veered left, and exited the runway onto the grass.  While on the grass, the 
airplane porpoised several times collapsing the nose landing gear.  The airplane came to a rest 
on its nose.
According to the FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, the nose wheel was folded 
under the airplane, the firewall was buckled, and the engine was displaced downward and to 
the left.
At 1410, the reported wind at the Amarillo International Airport was from 140 degrees at 14 
knots gusting to 19 knots.
