While on a test flight, in a new homebuilt experimental airplane, a fuel leak into the cockpit 
occurred.  The pilot declared an emergency, and during final approach to land, a fire developed 
in the cockpit.  The pilot ground looped the airplane on the runway in front of the tower.  Fixed  
base operator personnel extinguished the fire and removed the seriously injured pilot from the 
airplane.  Due to thermal damage, the source of the fuel leak and subsequent fire was not 
found.
an in-flight fire, which originated from a fuel leak of unknown origin.
On June 1, 2001, at 1208 mountain daylight time, an experimental homebuilt 2001 McGirl 
Questair Venture airplane, N5QV, was destroyed when it caught fire on short final to land at 
Ogden-Hinckley Airport, Ogden, Utah.  The airline transport pilot and sole occupant received 
serious thermal injuries.  The flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91 and no flight plan was 
filed.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The airplane was in a test status following construction and initial inspection by the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA).  The airframe had accumulated 12 hours of total time in 
service.
According to the pilot, he had proceeded to the test area in the vicinity of Brigham City, Utah, 
and was at 10,500 feet above men sea level (msl), when he noted some engine roughness.  He 
said he considered landing at Brigham City, but by manipulating the mixture control he was 
able to smooth out the engine operation so he decided to return to Ogden.  In his statement, 
the pilot said he was about 12 miles from Ogden when he noted a fuel leak which emanated 
from behind the glare shield and dripped on the cockpit floor and his right leg.  The Ogden Air 
Traffic Control Tower was notified and the pilot set up for a straight in landing on runway 16.  
He lowered the landing gear when he was about 2 miles from the runway and shut off the main 
fuel tank.
The pilot said that on short final, or just after landing, the fuel ignited and he had fire in the 
cockpit.  He said he released the canopy hold down and shut down the engine.  When in front 
of the tower, he said he ground looped the airplane, but was unable to exit on his own due to 
his hands being burned.
According to the tower controller, the pilot was cleared to land the airplane on any runway 
after informing the tower he had fuel/fumes in the cockpit.  Following a fast unstable landing 
on runway 16, the airplane reversed direction on the runway and stopped adjacent to the 
control tower with fire evident in and around the cockpit.  Persons who worked for the fixed 
base operator (FBO) extinguished the fire and removed the pilot from the airplane. 
Examination of the airplane provided evidence that the fire was more pronounced on the left 
and lower portion of the engine compartment and the left side of the cockpit.  Due to the fire 
damage, the origin of the fuel leak and subsequent fire was not found.
