Two agricultural airplanes, an Air Tractor 502B and a Cessna 188, collided in flight at low 
altitude over a field. The Cessna was working a field, and the Air Tractor was ferrying between 
aerial application sites when the collision occurred. Examination of both wreckage revealed 
that the right wing of the Cessna collided with the right elevator of the air tractor. The collision 
altitude was not determined. The right -a-way rule states that the airplane  to the right has the 
right-a-way. Valium was also detected in tissue samples from the Air tractor pilot. The sun 
position limited the visibility of the Cessna  pilot.
Failure of both pilots to maintain visual lookout, resulting in an in-flight collision. The air 
tractor pilot operated the positioning flight at an altitude below 500 feet agl. Valium was 
detected in the toxicological examination of the Air Tractor  pilot.
On June 2, 2001, at 0800 central daylight time, an Air Tractor 502B, N257LA, and a Cessna 
188, N731KG, collided in flight two miles north of Anguilla, Mississippi. The agricultural flights 
were operated by Nick's Flying Service, Inc., and Anguilla Flying Service, Inc., respectively, 
under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident. Both airplanes were destroyed, and the Cessna was consumed by post-
crash fire. Both commercial pilots were fatally injured. The Air Tractor departed a private 
airstrip at Rolling Fork, Mississippi, about 0735, and the Cessna departed a private airstrip in 
Anguilla, Mississippi, about 0750. 
According to information recovered  from Anguilla Flying Service, Inc., the Cessna had 
departed the private airstrip about 10 minutes before the accident, and was spraying a field 
adjacent to the east side of the field over which the collision occurred. The review of 
information from the operator revealed that  the Cessna appeared to have been on a easterly 
heading for the initial swath run to a field about 500 feet east of the in-flight collision. 
According to information recovered from Nick's Flying Service, Inc., the Air Tractor had 
completed an aerial application operation to a field four miles north of the accident site, and 
was enroute to another field miles south of the accident site. Reportedly, the Air Tractor, the 
Air Tractor was flying enroute  at a low altitude between the two locations, and the south 
bound direct flight path placed  the airplanes over the accident site.  The altitude at which the 
collisions occurred was not determined, however the Cessna was operating in accordance with 
FAR Part 137.49 for altitude and object clearance. 
Examination of the accident site showed that, the in-flight collision resulted in both airplanes 
colliding with the ground in a steep, nose-down, nearly wings-level attitude. The Cessna was 
consumed by post-crash fire.
Further examination of the accident site found the Air Tractor wreckage approximately 947 
feet south of what was determined to be the mid-air impact point. The Cessna wreckage was 
located approximately 426 feet east of the mid-air impact point. The airplanes' ground-impact 
points were approximately 1,004 feet apart. An area approximately 50 feet in diameter 
contained the Air Tractor's outboard piece of the right horizontal stabilizer and the right 
elevator, as well as the Cessna's right wingtip faring and a portion of the right aileron. Also 
present were scattered paint chips, rivet heads, and small pieces of sheet metal.   
Examination of the wreckage also revealed that the propellers assemblies from both airplanes 
showed evidence of power-on rotation at impact. Continuity of flight controls was not 
established on the Cessna due to extreme fire damage. Continuity of flight controls was 
confirmed on the Air Tractor. No mechanical irregularities and no pre-collision failures were 
noted of either airplane during the investigation. 
The sun inclination and azimuth for the accident location was 48.8 degrees inclination at 93.2 
degrees.
Dr. Steven T. Hayne, FCAP, of the Mississippi State Medical Examiner's Office, Brandon, 
Mississippi, conducted postmortem examinations of both pilots on June 3, 2001. 
The FAA's Toxicology and Research Laboratory in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
forensic toxicology on both pilots. Forensic toxicology performed on specimens from the Air 
Tractor pilot detected 0.047 (ug/ml, ug/g) diazepam (valium-sedative) in the blood, 0.06 
(ug/ml, ug/g) nordiazepam in the blood, 0.172 (ug/ml, ug/g) nordiazepam in the urine, as well 
as the presence of temazepam and oxazepam in the urine. Forensic toxicology performed on 
specimens from the Cessna pilot detected quinine in the kidney and liver.
A review of the Federal Aviation Regulations disclosed that when converging airplanes at the 
same altitude, the airplane to the right has the right -a-way.  The FARs further states that the 
minimum safe altitude over other than congested areas  is 500 feet above the surface except 
over sparsely populated areas, and in those cases the aircraft may not operate closer that 500 
feet to any person, vessel, vehicle, or structure (FAR Part 91,113,  91.119).
