The pilot departed Edmonton, Canada, with his passenger in the Cessna 172M, with 48 gallons 
of usable fuel aboard.  The trip included 2 stops before terminating at the end of the first day 
having flown 3 hours and 34 minutes.  The pilot added 12 gallons of fuel at his stopover.  The 
following day he and his passenger departed on the next leg of the trip (Great Falls, MT, to 
Pocatello, ID).  The engine quit after not less than 6 hours 51 minutes of operation on a total of 
60 gallons of usable fuel.  On site examination revealed no evidence of fuel in either fuel tank 
or spilled/leaked at the site, and only 4.5 ounces of fuel were retrieved from fuel lines.  The 
landing site was characterized by soft furrows in a field and the furrows were observed to 
change direction (from parallel) during the ground roll of the aircraft.  The pilot reported in a 
written statement that "...The pilot had thoughts of landing at Idaho Falls but decided to fly as 
flight planned...!"
The pilot's inadequate in-flight decision by failing to refuel while en route, resulting in fuel 
exhaustion and the loss of engine power.
On June 1, 2001, approximately 1315 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 172M, C-FDGH, 
registered to Dan Air Limited, and being flown by a Canadian certificated commercial pilot, 
was substantially damaged when it nosed over during a forced landing following a total loss of 
power while on a descent for landing near Pingree, Idaho.  The pilot and passenger were 
uninjured.  Visual meteorological conditions existed and a VFR flight plan was in effect.  The 
flight, which was personal, was operated under 14 CFR 91 and, according to the pilot, departed 
from Great Falls, Montana, at 0954 on the morning of the accident. 
The pilot reported that he departed Edmonton (CYXD), Alberta, with full fuel (48 gallons 
useable) stopping at Drumheller (CEG4), Alberta, Cut Bank (KCTB), Montana, and finally 
Great Falls (KGTF), Montana.  He then reported purchasing 12 gallons of fuel and departed for 
Pocatello, Idaho.  Approximately 20 miles out of Pocatello the engine abruptly stopped and the 
pilot was unable to achieve a restart.  He executed a forced landing in a potato field.  During 
the rollout, the soft dry furrows in the field changed orientation slightly and the aircraft nosed 
over.
The pilot reported in his statement (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) the following flight times and fuel 
loads associated with the trip:
FLIGHT LEG:TIME EN ROUTE*:FUELING:
CYXD-CEG41 hrs10 minutesDeparted with 48 gallons usable
CEG4-KCTB1 hrs35 minutesNo fuel added
KCTB-KGTF0 hrs49 minutes12 gallons fuel added
KGTF-SITE3 hrs16 minutes
TOTALS:6 hrs51 minutes60 gallons usable
*Does not include taxi and run up time.
The pilot further reported in his statement:  "...At approximately 13:00, shortly after passing 
Dubois VOR, Idaho Falls tower frequency was tuned in.  The pilot had thoughts of landing at 
Idaho Falls but decided to fly as flight planned!  FSS was then contacted to extend flight plan 
by 30 minutes.  C-FDGH commenced to descend out of 8,500 feet.  At twenty (20) statue [sic] 
miles out, Pocatello tower was contacted with the intention to land.  When out of 7,000 feet 
and about fifteen statue [sic] miles from Pocatello, the engine quit...."
A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector from the Salt Lake City Flight Standards District 
Office examined the aircraft and it was subsequently recovered from the accident site and 
transported to the Pocatello Airport.  During the examination and recovery process no fuel 
spillage was noted, and no fuel was found within either wing tank.  There was no evidence of a 
fuel spill at the site and no odor of fuel.  The 5/8 inch diameter fuel supply line between the 
gascolator and carburetor was removed and approximately 4.5 ounces of fuel was retrieved 
(refer to attached statement).
