Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Advance, IN
Accident Number:
CEN15FA194
Date & Time:
04/03/2015, 1540 EDT 
Registration:
N555GD
Aircraft:
S C AEROSTAR S A YAK 52TW
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Radar data showed the airplane maneuvering in visual meteorological conditions before radar 
contact was lost. Although the radar data showed the accident flight™s ground track, altitude 
information was not available for the maneuvering portion of the flight for reasons that could 
not be determined because the airplane's transponder was destroyed. There were no witnesses 
to the accident. Examination of the accident site indicated a high-airspeed, near-vertical 
impact with terrain consistent with a loss of airplane control. Although the wreckage was 
significantly fragmented, no evidence of any preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures of 
the airframe or engine were noted that would have precluded normal operation. No medical 
issues were identified with the pilot that would have contributed to the accident. The reason for 
the loss of control could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s loss of airplane control while maneuvering for reasons that could not be determined 
because an examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any preimpact 
abnormalities. 
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 7CEN15FA194
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On April 3, 2015, about 1540 eastern daylight time, a S C Aerostar S A Yak-52TW single-engine 
airplane, N555GD, was destroyed after impacting terrain while maneuvering near Advance, 
Indiana. The private rated pilot, who was the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries. The 
airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight. The local flight departed from the Eagle Creek 
Airpark (EYE), Indianapolis, Indiana, at 1509.
A review of the radar data showed the airplane departed runway 3 at EYE and traveled 
northwest toward Lebanon, Indiana, about parallel with Interstate 65 at an altitude of about 
2,000 feet above ground level (agl). Prior to reaching Lebanon, the airplane made a left turn 
and then performed a series of turns and maneuvers in the rural area south/southwest of 
Lebanon. The end of the radar flight track showed the airplane heading in a southerly 
direction. There were no known witnesses to the accident.  
According to friends of the pilot, after the pilot had not reported to work on April 6th, a 
missing persons report was filed with the local authorities. On April 10th, a friend of the pilot 
accessed the pilot's hangar and noted the pilot's work vehicle was parked in the hangar, and the 
airplane was not in the hangar. On April 10th, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
issued an Alert Notice (ALNOT) for the missing airplane. The airplane was located about 0830 
on April 12th by Civil Air Patrol personnel.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 58, held a private pilot certificate, with airplane single-engine land and 
instrument ratings. The pilot's FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on June 13, 2013, 
with a limitation of "Must have available glasses for near vision." The pilot's most recent flight 
review was completed on July 7, 2013, in the accident airplane.
According to a pilot logbook located by family representatives, the pilot had accumulated at 
least 1,781 total flight hours. The pilot's estimated flight hours in the accident airplane were 
500 total hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 2003 S. C. Aerostar S. A. Yak-52 TW, serial number 0212405. The 
airplane was powered by a Motostar M14-PDXK radial engine, and a 3-blade, constant-speed 
MT Propeller. The special airworthiness certificate was issued on February 6, 2013, in the 
experimental-exhibition category. The airplane was registered to the pilot on May 24, 2005.
The most recent conditional inspection was completed on March 29, 2014, at a total airframe 
and engine time of 1,029 hours. The airplane was equipped with a Garmin handheld global 
positioning system (GPS) and a Dynon D-10A Electronic Flight Information System (EFIS).
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1553, the EYE automated weather observation reported the wind from 360 degrees at 14 
knots, gusting to 20 knots, 10 miles visibility, sky overcast at 4,600 feet, temperature 12 
degrees C, dew point 3 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.84 inches of mercury.
Page 3 of 7CEN15FA194
RADAR AND COMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION
No communications between the pilot and air traffic control services were recorded.
Examination of the radar data showed that after departure from EYE, altitude reporting 
information was available for the accident airplane as it crossed over Interstate 65 and then 
flew parallel to Interstate 65. As the airplane turned to the south (left) away from Interstate 65, 
the altitude information disappeared and was no longer available. No altitude information was 
recorded for the maneuvering phase and remainder of the flight.
The airplane's transponder was destroyed during the accident and was not able to be 
functionally tested.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was located in a harvested cornfield about ½ miles southwest of the last 
radar contact. The wreckage was distributed on a measured magnetic heading of 350 degrees. 
The main wreckage consisted of the engine, fuselage, wings, and empennage, and was located 
in a crater about 8 feet in depth. Several fragmented pieces of the airplane were located within 
a 100-foot diameter of the main wreckage. No evidence of in-flight or post-impact fire was 
noted.
The airplane wreckage was recovered to a hangar at EYE for further examination. Some 
damage to the airplane was due to the extraction of the airplane from the impact crater. 
Examination of the airplane showed the left wing was separated at the wing root. The wing 
leading edge was crushed forward to aft. The left flap was found in the retracted position. The 
left main landing gear was separated. The aileron was partially detached from the wing.
The right wing was separated at the wing root. The wing leading edge was crushed forward to 
aft. The right flap was found in the retracted position. The right main landing gear was 
separated. The aileron was partially detached from the wing.
The fuselage was crushed and destroyed. The instrument panel and instruments were 
destroyed and no information from the cockpit instruments was available. The forward and aft 
seats and seat frames were crushed, and the canopy was destroyed.
The empennage was fragmented and destroyed. The left elevator was separated from its 
respective horizontal stabilizer, and the trim tab remained attached. The right elevator 
remained partially attached to the horizontal stabilizer. The left and right horizontal stabilizer 
leading edges were crushed forward to aft. The rudder was separated from the vertical 
stabilizer. The vertical stabilizer was crushed forward to aft. Evidence of a foreign object debris 
protector was observed inside the empennage section.
Flight control continuity was not established due to the fragmentation and damage to the 
airplane and its major components. All observed fracture surfaces of control cables and linkage 
were consistent with overload failure.
The engine was separated from the fuselage and fractured into three main sections. The engine 
and fractured sections were covered in earthen debris. Five engine cylinders were observed and 
four engine cylinders were absent from the recovered wreckage. Seven engine pistons were 
observed and two engine pistons were absent from the recovered wreckage. The engine could 
not be functionally tested due to damage.
The wooden propeller was found splinted into several sections in the debris field. Portions of 
Page 4 of 7CEN15FA194
three individual propeller blades were located.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Central Indiana Forensic Associates, LLC, at the 
authorization of the Boone County Coroner's Office. The listed cause of death was multiple 
blunt force injuries as a result of an accident.
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory (CAMI), Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicological testing on specimens from the pilot. The tests were negative for all 
screened drugs. Testing for carbon monoxide and cyanide were not performed. The report 
indicated 160 mg/dL ethanol in the liver, 41 mg/dL in the heart, and 28 mg/dL in the blood. N-
Propanol was detected in the blood.
Given the advanced stage of decomposition of the specimens, the ethanol found was likely from 
sources other than ingestion.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The Garmin GPSMAP, Dynon D-10A EFIS, and the pilot's mobile phone were sent to the NTSB 
Vehicle Recorder's Laboratory in Washington, DC, for examination and data download. 
Exterior examination of the Garmin GPS revealed significant damage. The memory chip was 
removed and downloaded using laboratory equipment. The data was successfully recovered 
using forensic software. The accident flight was not identified in the 65 recorded sessions from 
June 1, 2014, to March 22, 2015. Ten flights were recorded in the calendar year. No additional 
pertinent information could be extracted from the device. 
The Dynon D-10A was capable of storing data in the non-volatile memory (NVM). Exterior 
examination of the Dynon revealed significant damage. The memory chip was removed and 
downloaded using laboratory equipment. A thorough analysis of the imaged data showed that 
no data was recorded to the device and no further work was performed.
The pilot's mobile phone, an Apple iPhone 6+, was capable of storing data in the NVM. The 
extent of damage sustained by the iPhone precluded normal recovery procedures and 
additional attempts using surrogate units were unsuccessful in obtaining data. No data 
pertinent to the accident were recovered.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 5 of 7CEN15FA194
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
58
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/13/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/07/2013
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1781 hours (Total, all aircraft), 500 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
S C AEROSTAR S A
Registration:
N555GD
Model/Series:
YAK 52TW 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
0212405
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/29/2014, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2899 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1029 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
MOTORSTAR
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
M14-PDXK
Registered Owner:
FOY GLENN
Rated Power:
400 hp
Operator:
FOY GLENN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CEN15FA194
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KEYE, 823 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
16 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
133°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 20 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.84 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
INDIANAPOLIS, IN (EYE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
INDIANAPOLIS, IN (EYE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1509 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.995000, -86.543611
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Aaron M Sauer
Adopted Date:
01/14/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Leslie Thompson; Federal Aviation Administration; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
01/14/2016
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91011
Page 7 of 7CEN15FA194
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
