Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Greenville, SC
Incident Number:
ERA09IA315
Date & Time:
06/01/2009, 1500 EDT 
Registration:
N695CD
Aircraft:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Flight control sys malf/fail
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use
Analysis 
The pilot was "returning the airplane to service," following a maintenance inspection. No 
anomalies were noted during the preflight inspection, engine start, taxi, run-up, and takeoff 
roll. As the airplane became airborne, the pilot noticed that the elevator control felt "loose," 
with about 1/2 inch of "play." The pilot proceeded to an area west of the airport, where the he 
performed in-fight checks uneventfully. As the airplane was returning to the airport, on short 
final approach, the pilot reduced the throttle to idle power for landing. Subsequently, about 25 
feet above the ground, the nose pitched down. The pilot tried to pull back on the control yoke 
to flare, but the elevator control was stuck in the mid-range position. The airplane touched 
down on the nose gear and bounced back up into the air. The sudden jolt of the touchdown 
seemed to free the elevator control and the pilot was able to complete a normal landing. As the 
pilot taxied from the runway, he was able to duplicate the control jam. The operator noted that 
the pitch trim cartridge control rod felt "gritty" when actuated by hand. The operator 
subsequently reported that the anomaly did not reoccur after the pitch trim cartridge was 
removed and replaced. In addition, the operator did not report any work performed on the 
pitch trim cartridge during the recent maintenance inspection. Further examination of the 
airplane's pitch trim cartridge revealed some corrosion and black grease residue present; 
however, there was no conclusive evidence found to support a flight control jam.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
A pitch control malfunction for undetermined reasons.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA09IA315
Factual Information
On June 1, 2009, about 1500 eastern daylight time, a Cirrus Design Corp. SR22, N695CD, 
registered to and operated by SATSair LLC. as a Title 14 Code of Federal regulations Part 91 
maintenance flight, experienced a control malfunction while on approach to Greenville 
Downtown Airport (GMU), Greenville, South Carolina. The certificated airline transport pilot 
was not injured and the airplane was not damaged. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight planned was filed. The flight departed from GMU at 1430. 
The pilot reported that he was "returning the airplane to service," following a maintenance 
inspection. No anomalies were noted during the preflight inspection, engine start, taxi, run-up, 
and takeoff roll. As the airplane became airborne, the pilot noticed that the elevator control felt 
"loose," with about 1/2 inch of "play." The pilot proceeded to an area west of GMU, where he 
performed in-fight checks uneventfully. 
As the airplane was returning to GMU, on short final approach, the pilot reduced the throttle to 
idle power for landing. Subsequently, about 25 feet above ground level, the nose pitched down. 
The pilot tried to pull back on the yoke to flare, but the elevator control was stuck in the mid-
range position. The airplane touched down on the nose gear first and then bounced back up 
into the air. The sudden jolt of the touchdown seemed to free the elevator control and the pilot 
was able complete a normal landing. As the pilot taxied from the runway, he was able to 
duplicate the control jam. 
The operator's director of maintenance (DOM) reported that no work was performed on the 
pitch trim cartridge during the recent maintenance inspection. After the incident, the elevator 
pitch trim cartridge was removed. When the DOM actuated the cartridge by hand, he felt the 
spring functioning, but noted that the control rod movement was "gritty." The DOM further 
stated that the anomaly did not reoccur after the pitch trim cartridge was removed and 
replaced. 
The airplane's pitch trim cartridge was forwarded to the manufacturer's facility for further 
examination under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector. The 
examination revealed some corrosion and black grease residue was present; however, there 
was no conclusive evidence found to support a flight control jam. Additionally, the 
manufacturer's representatives were not able to document the suspect cartridge as it was 
installed, before it was removed and replaced. A manufacturer's representative added that 
although the elevator control linkage moves through the pitch trim cartridge to the aft elevator 
bellcrank, an electric elevator trim motor moves the entire pitch trim cartridge and aft elevator 
bellcrank, which provides system redundancy in the event of a primary elevator control 
malfunction. 
The DOM subsequently reported that the suspect pitch trim cartridge had been the original 
cartridge installed on the airplane and that the airplane had been operated for 2,562 hours at 
the time of the event. Although the pitch trim cartridge was required to be inspected, there was 
no requirement to replace it at a specific time interval. 
After the incident, the operator implemented a program to voluntarily remove and replace 
pitch trim cartridges at 2,000 hours of operation, and forward the used cartridges to the 
manufacturer for examination.
During the investigation, another operator reported similar issues pertaining to trim cartridge 
Page 3 of 5ERA09IA315
"sticking," involving five Cirrus airplanes. Those events occurred shortly after the new 
airplanes left the factory. Subsequent interviews with mechanics and an FAA inspector, along 
with further information from the second operator, revealed that one airplane had an elevator 
pitch trim cartridge sticking due to a lack of lubrication. Another airplane had a roll trim 
cartridge removed and replaced at the customer's request, in an effort to troubleshoot a wing-
rocking problem. The other three airplanes were noted to have trim cartridge (roll, yaw, and/or 
pitch) sticking possibly due to an aileron-rudder interconnect issue, cartridge misalignment, 
and/or debris particles becoming temporarily stuck in the cartridge.
 
Review of the National Transportation Safety Board database and FAA service difficulty 
reports, for a 5-year period preceding the SATSair incident, did not reveal any similar 
occurrences pertaining to sticking or temporary jamming of any Cirrus pitch trim cartridge.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Flight control sys malf/fail (Defining event)
Landing
Abnormal runway contact
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/18/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/26/2009
Flight Time:
12000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model), 11650 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 87 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA09IA315
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration:
N695CD
Model/Series:
SR22 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1372
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/31/2009, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2562 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental Motors
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550-N
Registered Owner:
SATSAIR LLC
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
SATSAIR LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GMU, 1006 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29째C / 15째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Greenville, SC (GMU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Greenville, SC (GMU)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1430 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Greenville Downtown Airport (GMU)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1048 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
10
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3998 ft / 80 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Straight-in
Page 5 of 5ERA09IA315
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.848056, -82.350000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
10/19/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Bob Switter; FAA/FSDO; West Columbia, SC
Publish Date:
10/20/2009
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=73944
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
