National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MARIETTA, OK
Accident Number: FTW98LA137
Date & Time: 03/01/1998, 1415 CST
Registration: N84561
Aircraft: Cessna 172K
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While on final approach to runway 35 at the McGehee Catfish Restaurant Airport, the aircraft encountered a north-westerly crosswind and the pilot performed a go-around.
During a second approach to runway 35, an 'unpredictable crosswinds/windshear exceeded control capability of A/C,' and blew the aircraft to the right of the runway into the top of 30 foot trees.
The pilot applied full power, the aircraft began to climb, and he turned into the wind.
Subsequently, the aircraft struck a power line, and came to rest inverted about 100 yards south of the runway.
The pilot reported that at the time of the accident, the wind was from 330 degrees at 18 knots gusting to 25.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper compensation for the wind conditions.
A factor was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.
The private pilot and one passenger were seriously injured, and the other passenger sustained minor injuries.
The flight originated from Tyler, Texas, at 1230.
The 1,386 hour pilot reported that while on final approach to runway 35, the aircraft encountered a north-westerly crosswind and he performed a go-around.
During his second approach to runway 35, an "unpredictable crosswinds/windshear exceeded [the] control capability of A/C," and blew the aircraft to the right of the runway into the top of 30 foot trees.
The pilot further reported that he applied full power, the aircraft began to climb, and he turned into the wind.
Subsequently, the aircraft struck a power line, and came to rest inverted about 100 yards south of the runway.
The pilot also reported that at the time of the accident, the wind was from 330 degrees at 18 knots gusting to 25.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that the firewall was damaged, and the nose landing gear assembly was separated from the aircraft.
The left and right wing struts, the right horizontal stabilizer, and the leading edge of the left wing were damaged.
He added that runway 35 is a 2,450 feet long, by 55 feet wide grass strip situated in a low area surrounded by hills and trees on both sides.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
