National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DAVIS, CA
Accident Number: LAX98LA100
Date & Time: 03/01/1998, 1300 PST
Registration: N57085
Aircraft: Ryan PT22-ST3KR
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was performing a wheel landing and said that when he lowered the tail, the aircraft veered off to the left side of the runway.
He reported that he then added power, but the aircraft was already in the soft mud.
The aircraft then nosed over and came to rest inverted.
In his written report, the pilot said there were no mechanical malfunctions with the aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the aircraft on the landing roll.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - NOT CORRECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT Factual Information On March 1, 1998, at 1300 hours Pacific standard time, a Ryan PT22-ST3KR, N57085, veered off the runway and nosed over during the landing roll at the Davis, California, airport.
The aircraft sustained substantial damage and the pilot/owner, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The personal flight originated at the Vacaville, California, airport at 1200 and was terminating at the time of the accident.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
According to the pilot, he was performing a wheel landing on runway 34.
The pilot stated that when he lowered the tail, the aircraft veered off to the left side of the runway.
He reported that he then added power, but the aircraft was already in the soft mud.
The aircraft then nosed over and came to rest inverted.
In his written report, the pilot said there were no mechanical malfunctions with the aircraft.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Engineer Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
