National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MADERA, CA
Accident Number: LAX98LA099
Date & Time: 03/01/1998, 1641 PST
Registration: N546SH
Aircraft: Sweet-House RD MUSTANG 2
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was on approach to runway 30.
As he initiated the flare, he felt the airplane bleed off airspeed quicker than anticipated and realized that 'the aircraft was quickly starting to stall.'
The pilot stated that he knew that he was too high and applied power to arrest the stall but the left wing dropped and seemed to start flying again when power was applied.
The pilot then attempted to abort the landing and execute a go-around but the aircraft veered to the left off the runway.
The left wingtip contacted the ground, followed by the engine and right wing.
The right wing broke off at the wing splice point and the aircraft nosed over and came to rest inverted.
The pilot reported that at the time of the accident he had logged only 1 hour in this type of aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed during the approach, which resulted in a stall.
An additional cause was the pilot's failure to maintain directional control during the attempted go around.
A factor in this accident is the pilot's lack of total experience in aircraft type.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) STALL/MUSH - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
GO-AROUND - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
The aircraft sustained substantial damage and the pilot/owner, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The local personal flight began at 1600 and was terminating at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that he was on approach to runway 30.
As he initiated the flare, he felt "the airplane bleed off airspeed quicker than anticipated," and realized that "the aircraft was quickly starting to stall."
The pilot reported that he "knew that [he] was too high and applied power to arrest the stall [but] the left wing dropped [and] seemed to start flying again when power was applied."
The pilot further reported that he then attempted to abort the landing and execute a go-around but the aircraft veered to the left off the runway.
The left wingtip impacted the ground and the pilot reported that he then "had no control over the aircraft."
The propeller and engine then impacted the ground and the right wing broke off at the wing splice point.
The aircraft nosed over and came to rest inverted.
The pilot reported that at the time of the accident he had logged only 1 hour in this type of aircraft.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 44, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
