National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LANCASTER, CA
Accident Number: LAX98LA101
Date & Time: 03/02/1998, 1230 PST
Registration: N608G
Aircraft: Cessna 310C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot attempted takeoff with the mixture controls in an intermediate lean position.
The right engine stopped running approximately 300 feet agl, and the pilot elected to land straight ahead rather than attempt a single engine return for landing.
When asked about the lean mixture setting for takeoff, the pilot stated that her mechanic had told her to do it that way.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper use of the mixture controls.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) MIXTURE - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN Factual Information On March 2, 1998, at 1230 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 310C, N608G, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain following takeoff from the William J.
Fox Airport, Lancaster, California.
There were minor injuries to the commercial pilot and one passenger and no damage to ground structures or surrounding terrain.
The pilot stated to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that after the right engine stopped at an altitude of approximately 300 feet agl, the decision was made to land straight ahead with the gear down rather than attempt a single engine closed traffic pattern.
Upon examination of the aircraft cockpit following the forced landing, the FAA inspector found both mixture controls in an intermediate lean position.
When he interviewed the pilot as to why that position was used for takeoff, she stated that her aircraft mechanic had told her to do it that way.
No other airframe discrepancies were noted and the aircraft had been refueled prior to takeoff.
An examination of the aircraft engines was conducted and no evidence of mechanical malfunction was found in either engine.
Both rotated freely, had thumb compression on all cylinders with corresponding valve action, and ignition was verified to all sparkplugs.
There was no contamination found in the fuel systems and the engine oil was clear for both.
The spline drive on the right engine driven fuel pump was found partially severed and there was rust on the inside of the pump housing.
However, the pump was flow tested using an electric drill to turn it and it pumped a solid stream of fuel with no cavitation bubbles visible.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 26, Female Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
