National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RAYVILLE, LA
Accident Number: FTW98LA141
Date & Time: 03/01/1998, 1600 CST
Registration: N4GQ
Aircraft: Piper PA-32-300
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the landing flare/touchdown, the airplane was configured for the gusting wind; however, during the landing roll, the wind 'gust let up and the airplane departed the paved runway to the left side.
The turf was soggy and wet and the airplane went into a ditch paralleling the runway, collapsing the nose gear before the airplane stopped.'
The pilot obtained weather briefings and was aware of the crosswind conditions at the destination airport.
During the landing, there was a direct crosswind from the left with the winds at 10 to 15 knots gusting at 20 to 25 knots.
The pilot stated that the accident could have been prevented by landing at an alternate airport in order to land more directly into the wind.
The pilot further stated that he is taking flight 'lessons in a tail dragger (tailwheel aircraft) in order to gain more experience of managing an aircraft in cross wind conditions.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the gusting crosswinds.
Factors were the gusting crosswinds and the pilot's lack of experience in gusting crosswinds.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OPERATION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 5.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 6.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WET 7.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On March 1, 1998, at 1600 central standard time, a Piper PA-32-300 airplane, N4GQ, sustained substantial damage following a loss of control while landing at Rayville, Louisiana.
The airplane was owned and operated by a private individual under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal cross country flight and a flight plan was not filed for the flight that departed Waco, Texas, at 1400.
During a personal interview, conducted by the investigator-in-charge, and on the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported that he obtained weather briefings prior to and during the flight and was aware of the cross wind conditions at the destination airport.
During the landing on runway 36, there was a direct cross wind from the left with the winds at 10 to 15 knots gusting at 20 to 25 knots.
During the landing flare/touchdown the airplane was configured for the gusting wind; however, during the landing roll, the wind "gust let up and the airplane departed the paved runway to the left side.
The turf was soggy and wet and the airplane went into a ditch paralleling the runway, collapsing the nose gear before the airplane stopped."
An FAA Designated Airworthiness Representative examined the airplane.
He found structural damage occurred to the propeller, nose gear, engine mount, firewall, and fuselage.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, the pilot stated that the accident could have been prevented by landing at an alternate airport in order to land more directly into the wind.
The pilot further stated that he is taking flight "lessons in a tail dragger (tailwheel aircraft) in order to gain more experience on managing an aircraft in cross wind conditions."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
