Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Phoenix, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR14FA111
Date & Time:
02/04/2014, 1150 MST 
Registration:
N312PA
Aircraft:
PIPER PA 28-181
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The student and flight instructor were conducting touch-and-go landings. The student flew an 
approach that required slipping the airplane and maintaining a low engine power setting. 
During the climb after the touch-and-go landing, the airplane™s engine lost power about 200 ft 
above ground level. The flight instructor stated that the engine™s rpm was decreasing and he 
decided to turn toward the airport area. Subsequently, the flight instructor initiated a forced 
landing to a field near the airport. During the landing sequence, the airplane struck and 
breached the airport™s perimeter fence and then nosed over; a postaccident fire ensued. The 
postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.
During the examination of the airplane wreckage, the fuel selector was found in an 
intermediate position. Ground testing of a similar model airplane revealed that the engine 
could run several minutes with the fuel selector positioned in this intermediate position. The 
student and the instructor stated that the student switched the fuel selector about 9 miles from 
the airport per operator requirements to switch fuel tanks every 30 minutes. Because of the 
location of the fuel selector, the flight instructor could not visually confirm its position. It is 
likely that the student inadvertently positioned the airplane™s fuel selector in an intermediate 
setting, which restricted the engine™s fuel supply. Further, the engine™s low power setting 
during the approach allowed the engine to run for several minutes on the fuel remaining in the 
return line and operate until shortly after the completion of the touch-and-go landing. 
Subsequently, during the climb, when the engine power was advanced, it is likely that the 
remaining fuel in the return line was exhausted and led to the engine power loss. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilot™s inadvertent positioning of the fuel selector in an intermediate position, 
which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.
Page 2 of 8WPR14FA111
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Student pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8WPR14FA111
Factual Information
On February 4, 2014, about 1150 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-28-181, N312PA, 
sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following a reported loss of engine power 
shortly after takeoff from the Phoenix Deer Valley Airport (DVT) Phoenix, Arizona. The 
airplane was registered to Bird Acquisition L.L.C. and operated by TransPac Aviation Academy 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The student pilot and 
certified flight instructor (CFI) were seriously injured. A passenger, who was also a CFI, 
sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the instructional flight. The local flight departed DVT about 1105.
In a written statement, the CFI reported that the engine lost power about 200 feet above 
ground level, during climb out from runway 07L, after performing a touch and go landing. The 
CFI further stated that the engine's rpm was decreasing and the engine experienced a brief 
surge of power but it was not sustained. He decided to turn and initiated a forced landing to a 
field in the vicinity of the airport. During the landing sequence, the airplane struck the airport's 
perimeter fence, breached it, and subsequently nosed over where a postaccident fire ensued.
During interviews with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the CFI and student pilot stated that just prior to descent, the fuel selector was 
switched about 9 miles from the airport, in accordance with their company fuel procedures that 
required the tanks to be switched every 30 minutes. The student pilot did not recall which tank 
was selected and the CFI said he could not visually confirm the fuel selector position. The 
student pilot did not remember touching the fuel selector after switching fuel tanks. This was 
the first approach flown at the airport since returning from practice area work. A simulated 
high energy approach was flown that required slipping the airplane, with the throttle 
positioned at a low power setting. When the engine lost power; the CFI took control of the 
airplane and stated that he looked for a place to land and did not have time to run any 
emergency procedures checklist items including changing the fuel selector position.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The CFI pilot, age 27, held a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single engine, multi-
engine, instrument, instructor single-engine, and instructor multi-engine ratings. The CFI was 
issued a first-class airman medical certificate on September 28, 2010, with no limitations 
stated. The CFI stated that he had accumulated a total of 3,019 flight hours; 68 hours within 
the preceding 90 days, 28 hours within the preceding 30 days, and no logged flight hours 
within the previous 24 hours. The total time logged in the accident type airplane was 2,418 
hours. 
The student pilot, age 21, was issued a third-class medical on October 2, 2013 with no 
limitations stated. The student pilot stated that he had accumulated a total of 61 flight hours; 
50 hours within the preceding 90 days, 30 hours within the preceding 30 days, and no logged 
flight hours within the previous 24 hours. The total time logged in the accident make type 
airplane was 61 hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The four-seat, low-wing, fixed-gear airplane, serial number (S/N) 2843509, was manufactured 
in 2002. It was powered by a Lycoming-360-A4M engine, serial number L-22500-36A, rated at 
180 horsepower. The airplane was also equipped with a Sensenich model 76EM8S14-0-62, 
Page 4 of 8WPR14FA111
serial number 101187K, fixed pitch propeller. Reviews of copies of the maintenance logbook 
show an approved inspection program was completed on January 21, 2014, at an airframe total 
time of 14,186 hours. 
A review of the fueling records indicated that the airplane had been refueled the night before to 
their company standard load or "tabs," which was about 17 gallons per wing tank. The accident 
flight was the airplane's first flight of the day.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A review of recorded data from the Phoenix Deer Valley Airport, Phoenix, Arizona, automated 
weather observation station located at the accident site, revealed at 1153 conditions were wind 
from 200 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, clear sky, temperature 12 degrees 
Celsius, dew point -1 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.05 inches of mercury. 
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Phoenix Deer Valley Airport (DVT) is a towered airport with a reported field elevation of 1,478 
feet. The airport was equipped with parallel asphalt runways, runway 07R/25L (8,196 feet long 
by 100 feet wide); runway 07L/25R (4,500 feet long by 75 feet wide). Airport remarks have 
runway 07L/25R designated as the training runway.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The NTSB IIC, examined the airplane at the accident site. The examination revealed that the 
airplane impacted an airport perimeter fence about half a mile southeast of runway 7L. All 
major structural components of the airplane were present at the wreckage site. Tire marks in 
the dirt of about 300 feet lead to the area of the fence where the airplane struck and breeched 
it. 
The airplane came to rest upright on its right side on a heading of about 130 degrees magnetic 
approximately 42 feet from the fence. Examination of the airframe revealed that the fuselage 
was thermally damaged and that both wings were separated from the fuselage. The left wing 
was thermally damaged, while the right wing sustained some thermal damage but was mostly 
intact. The empennage section was thermally damaged but the upper tail section separated 
from the empennage and was mostly intact.
The rudder remained attached to its respective attach points and the bottom half was 
consumed by thermal damage. The elevators were intact and remained attached at all the 
respective attach points. 
The instrument control panel and cabin area were consumed by the post impact fire.
The postaccident examination of the airframe revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions 
or failures that would have precluded normal operation.
The wreckage was recovered to a secure location for further examination.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Examination of the airframe and engine revealed that the left wing separated from the fuselage 
and about 4 feet of the wing tip separated. The right wing separated from the fuselage and 
some fuel remained in the fuel tank during the recovery. In the empennage section, the right 
horizontal surface tip was bent upwards. The stabilizer trim had 1 ½ visible threads that were 
observed that corresponded to a nose down trim setting. Flight control continuity was 
Page 5 of 8WPR14FA111
established with the flight controls through the cables.
The fuel selector valve (FSV) was located in the cabin area. The area sustained thermal damage 
and the FSV was scorched. The FSV separated as fire consumed its supporting structure and 
associated metal fuel lines. There are three positions; OFF, left, and right for the FSV, with OFF 
at the 9 o'clock position, left at the 12 o'clock position, and right at the 3 o'clock position. The 
position of the valve was determined by the position of the "D" ring in the fuel valve stem. The 
flat portion of the valve stem goes towards the bottom side of the selector handle and the 
rounded portion correlates with the position of the pointer on the handle. The fuel valve was 
observed about 20 degrees to the right, from the 12 o'clock position, off from the left tank 
detent. This intermediate position was between the left and right fuel tank positions. According 
to the manufacturer, in this position, an undetermined amount of fuel would flow through the 
valve from the main tanks.
Examination of the Lycoming O-360-A4M engine, serial number l-22500-36A revealed that it 
remained attached to the airframe by the engine mount and sustained thermal damage. The 
engine accessories remained attached to the engine via their respective mounts. All rocker 
covers were removed and the cylinder overhead areas were lubricated and unremarkable. The 
crankshaft was rotated by hand utilizing the propeller and rotational continuity was 
established throughout the engine and valve train. During crankshaft rotation thumb 
compression and suction was attained on all cylinders. A borescope inspection of the cylinders 
revealed normal operational conditions.
The left magneto had been replaced with an Electroair Electronic ignition EIS-4000 system 
which had been installed in accordance with a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC). Thermal 
damage to the unit prevented any function testing. The right magneto was removed and a 
spark was produced at all the respective leads during hand rotation. The sparkplugs were 
removed and all sparkplug electrodes exhibited normal wear signatures when compared to the 
Champion Check-A-Plug comparison chart. 
The carburetor was removed and disassembled for examination. The carburetor did not 
discharge any fuel at the accelerator discharge port during actuation of the throttle lever. The 
needle valve and float assemblies were intact. The fuel inlet screen was free of debris. No fuel 
was observed in the carburetor fuel bowl and accelerator pump chamber.  
The engine driven fuel pump was removed for examination. The fuel pump was observed to be 
free of internal mechanical malfunction and obstruction to fuel flow and the diaphragm 
remained intact. The electric fuel pump was removed for examination. The electric pump 
sustained external thermal damage but was observed free of internal malfunction and no 
obstructions to fuel flow were noted. An external battery source was used to supply power to 
the pump and upon application of power, the motor was functional. 
The two-bladed propeller remained attached to the crankshaft flange. The spinner was 
attached to the propeller and was intact. Marks and abrasions were observed on the spinner, 
that were nearly chord-wise in direction.
The examination of the engine revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures 
that would have precluded normal operation.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector, ground tested a similar Piper model PA28-181, 
Page 6 of 8WPR14FA111
for fuel consumption that was available in the fuel return line. After warming up the engine, 
the fuel selector was positioned to an intermediate setting (as per the position the accident 
airplane's fuel selector was found). The engine ran for about 8 to 9 minutes at 2200 rpm, with 
the electric fuel pump in the on position, before it began to sputter, dropping from 150 -200 
rpm and back up to 2200 rpm. The fuel pressure was indicating zero on the gauge with the fuel 
selector in this position. The ground test was attempted again with the electric fuel pump in the 
off position and the engine stopped operating in this position.
 
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial; 
Private
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/28/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/20/2013
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 3019 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2418 hours (Total, this make and model), 2921 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 68 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 30 
days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
21, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/02/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 61 hours (Total, all aircraft), 61 hours (Total, this make and model), 10 hours (Pilot 
In Command, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 7 of 8WPR14FA111
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N312PA
Model/Series:
PA 28-181 181
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2843509
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/21/2014, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
14186 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360 SERIES
Registered Owner:
BIRD ACQUISITION LLC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
TransPac Aviation Academy
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Pilot School (141)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
173S
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DVT, 1478 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
95°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Phoenix, AZ (DVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Phoenix, AZ (DVT)
Type of Clearance:
Traffic Advisory; VFR
Departure Time:
1105 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
PHOENIX DEER VALLEY (DVT)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1478 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry; Rough
Runway Used:
07L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4499 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 8 of 8WPR14FA111
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.688333, -112.082500 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Albert P Nixon
Adopted Date:
02/29/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Dan Gilligan; FAA; Scottsdale, AZ
Charles Little; Piper Aircraft, Inc.; Vero Beach, FL
Mark Platt; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
David Morse; TransPac Aviation Academy; Phoenix, AZ
Publish Date:
02/29/2016
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88768
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
