Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bisbee, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX07LA027
Date & Time:
11/01/2006, 0930 MST 
Registration:
None
Aircraft:
Air Creations Tanarg 912
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The unregistered aircraft collided with a steep mountainside.  A pilot, who was flying an 
ultralight in tandem with the accident aircraft, stated that the accident pilot was providing 
instruction to the student pilot on the cross-country flight.  The accident pilot maintained radio 
communication with him as they both maneuvered through the valleys that led to their 
intended destination.  Throughout the flight, the radio signal was intermittent due to the 
contours of the terrain.  The ultralight pilot further stated that after egressing the valleys he 
turned around to scan the surrounding area and could not obtain visual contact of the accident 
aircraft.  He headed back up the valley and saw smoke behind a mountain ridge.  He circled 
over the smoke and observed a small brush fire, but could not discern any aircraft structure.  
He stated that the winds at the time of the accident were calm and there was no turbulence or 
mountain wave in the areas they were flying.  The inaccessibility of the accident site prohibited 
the wreckage from being recovered.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the mountainous terrain.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
2. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 5LAX07LA027
Factual Information
On November 01, 2006, about 0930 mountain standard time, an Air Creations Tanarg 912 
unregistered aircraft, collided with a steep mountain side near Bisbee, Arizona.  The 
pilot/owner was operating the unregistered aircraft under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 as a 
cross-country instructional flight.  The airplane was destroyed.  The pilot, who held a sport 
pilot certificate, and a student pilot sustained fatal injuries.  The flight departed from Rodeo, 
New Mexico, about 0830, with a planned destination of Bisbee.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed.
A National Transportation Safety Board investigator interviewed a pilot who was flying an 
ultralight in tandem with the accident aircraft.  He stated that the accident pilot was providing 
instruction to the student pilot on the cross-country flight to Bisbee.  The accident pilot 
maintained radio communication with him as they both  traversed through the valleys that led 
to their intended destination.  Throughout the flight, the radio signal was intermittent due to 
the contours of the terrain.  While en route through the Starvation and Skeleton Valleys, the 
accident pilot made a radio call that indicated he was at the "4-o'clock" position behind the 
ultralight. 
 
The ultralight pilot further stated that after egressing the valleys, he turned around to scan the 
surrounding area and could not obtain visual contact with the accident aircraft.  He headed 
back up the valley and saw smoke behind a mountain ridge.  He circled over the over the smoke 
and observed a small brush fire, but could not discern any aircraft structure.  He continued on 
to Bisbee and attempted to locate the accident ultralight at the airport to no avail.  
The ultralight pilot added that the winds at the time of the accident were calm and there was no 
turbulence or mountain wave in the areas they were flying.  
PILOT INFORMATION
A review of the airmen records maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
disclosed that the pilot held a sport pilot certificate.  There was no record that he had ever 
applied for, or been granted, an FAA medical certificate. 
No personal logbooks for the pilot were recovered.  Friends of the pilot reported that he had 
been flight instructing in the accident aircraft.  
Friends of the pilot provided a Safety Board investigator with paperwork found within his 
personal belongings.  Some of those documents contained information regarding the accident 
pilot's experience.  In an acceptance letter, the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) 
indicated that the accident pilot was a registered member in the ultralight student registration 
program.  Other documents indicated that pilot had completed an Aero Sports Connection 
(ASC) Basic Flight Instructor application, signed September 26, 2006.  On the application, the 
pilot reported having amassed 65 hours total time in ultralight aircraft, of which 20 hours were 
with a flight instructor.  The ASC had no record of the pilot, or having ever received the 
application.
 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
Page 3 of 5LAX07LA027
The Cochise County Office of the Medical Examiner, Sierra Vista, Arizona, completed an 
autopsy on November 02, 2006.  The Medical Examiner stated an anatomic summary as 
follows, "full-thickness thermal burns; 100 percent of skin surfaces, with carbon monoxide 
asphyxiation." 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The inaccessibility of the accident site prohibited the wreckage from being recovered.
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Sport Pilot
Age:
22, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
None 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
65 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Air Creations
Registration:
None
Model/Series:
Tanarg 912 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
TOS004
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
912
Registered Owner:
NONE
Rated Power:
56
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5LAX07LA027
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Rodeo, NM (NM70)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bisbee, AZ (DUG)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0830 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
31.537222, -109.087500
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Zoë Keliher
Adopted Date:
06/27/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Christine Clark; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5LAX07LA027
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
