Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Patuxent River, MD
Accident Number:
IAD02LA080
Date & Time:
08/01/2002, 1420 EDT 
Registration:
N1177M
Aircraft:
Cessna 172K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Prior to his departure, the pilot performed a preflight inspection and determined the fuel 
onboard the airplane by observing the fuel gauges in the cockpit.  The gauges indicated the fuel 
tanks were about 1/4 - 1/2 full, or 8 gallons of fuel per tank.  The pilot stated he did not visually 
check the fuel tanks because he did not have a way to measure the fuel.  The pilot added 20 
additional gallons of fuel, for a total of 36 gallons of fuel onboard, which he estimated to be 4 
1/2 hours flight time.  After fueling the airplane, the fuel gauges read about 3/4 full on each 
tank.  The pilot flew direct to his destination; however, he did not perform any fuel burn 
calculations en route.  Approximately 3 miles from the airport, the airplane's engine lost power.  
The pilot checked the fuel gauges, which indicated 1/8 full on the left side and 1/4 full on the 
right side.  He unsuccessfully attempted to restart the engine, and performed a forced landing 
approximately 1/2 mile short of the runway.  Examination of the airplane revealed that the left 
wing tank was completely empty and 1/8 inch of fuel remained in the right wing tank.  The 
airplane's fuel system was examined and no pre-impact anomalies were noted.  A test run of 
the engine was performed on the airframe, and it started without hesitation and ran 
continuously through a variety of power settings.  An accurate test of the fuel level transmitters 
and fuel gauges was unable to be performed during the initial examination, because they were 
removed and retained by the operator.  The pilot had accumulated 124 hours of fixed-wing 
flight experience, 9 of which were in make and model, and 691 hours in rotorcraft.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate fuel calculations, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and a subsequent 
loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 7IAD02LA080
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
1. FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) FUEL SUPPLY - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) FUEL CONSUMPTION CALCULATIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
----------
Occurrence #4: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Page 3 of 7IAD02LA080
Factual Information
On August 1, 2002, at 1420 eastern daylight time, N1177M, a Cessna 172K, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing while on approach to Patuxent River Naval Air 
Station/Trapnell Field (NHK), Patuxent River, Maryland.  The certificated commercial pilot 
received serious injuries and the passenger received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed for the flight which 
originated at Myrtle Beach International Airport (MYR), Myrtle Beach, South Carolina at 1155.  
The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.  
The pilot reported that he had flown from Patuxent River to Myrtle Beach 2 days prior to the 
accident for a short vacation before beginning Navy test pilot school.  The pilot flew direct to 
Myrtle Beach, and upon landing the airplane's Hobbs meter indicated the flight duration had 
been 3.7 hours.  
On the day of the accident, the pilot received a weather briefing from Anderson Flight Service 
Station (FSS) for the return flight from Myrtle Beach to Patuxent River, and filed a VFR flight 
plan.  He then performed a pre-flight inspection and visually checked the fuel gauges inside the 
airplane.  According to the pilot, the gauges indicated that the tanks were about 1/4 - 1/2 full, 
which he estimated to be about 8 gallons of fuel per tank.  The pilot stated that he was unable 
to determine exactly how much fuel was in the tanks because he did not have a way to measure 
it.
The pilot added 20 gallons of fuel to the tanks, and estimated that he had a total of 36 gallons 
of fuel onboard, or 4 1/2 hours of flight time.  He started the airplane around 1145, taxied to the 
runway, performed a runup check, and checked the fuel gauges again.  They indicated about 
3/4 tank each side, which he estimated to be 36 gallons of total fuel.  
The pilot flew direct to Patuxent River at an altitude of 5,500 feet, and a power setting between 
2,400-2,500 rpm.  The carburetor heat was applied "occasionally" as the carb ice detector 
indicated "prudent" and the engine was leaned "periodically."  The pilot performed several 
ground speed calculations during the flight, indicating a consistent groundspeed of 100-110 
mph.  The pilot did not perform any fuel burn calculations during the flight.
When the pilot was about 10 miles from the airport, he was instructed by the tower controller 
to expect a left base entry for a full-stop landing on runway 02.  About 3 miles from the airport, 
the pilot was instructed to perform a 360-degree turn for spacing and to change to a straight-in 
approach for runway 06.  As the pilot was leveling the airplane from the turn, the airplane's 
engine "stopped producing power."  The pilot then checked the fuel gauges which indicated 1/8 
full on the left side, and 1/4 full on the right side.  He increased the throttle, which 
momentarily brought power back to the engine.  The airplane then pitched up, and the engine 
lost power again.  The pilot initiated a 90-degree turn and held a nose-high attitude to clear 
trees in the flight path.  Once over the tree line, the pilot lowered the nose and performed a 
forced landing to a field.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the airplane impacted the 
ground approximately 1/2 mile short of runway 06, on an approximate heading of 150 degrees.  
Visual examination of the fuel tanks revealed that the left wing tank was "completely dry," and 
approximately 1/8 of an inch of fuel was observed in the right wing fuel tank.  The fuel selector 
was observed between the "both" and "right" positions, and the mixture and throttle control 
Page 4 of 7IAD02LA080
levers were observed in the full forward position. 
The engine was examined at a salvage facility in Clayton, Delaware, under the supervision of a 
Safety Board Investigator.  The fuel lines from the wing roots to the gascolotors were absent of 
debris and obstructions, and the carburetor and gascolator fuel screens were also absent of 
debris.  Less than 1 teaspoon of fuel was observed in the gascolator bowl.  A test run of the 
engine was performed, on the airframe, by introducing fuel directly to the carburetor.  The 
engine started without hesitation and ran continuously through a variety of power settings.  
During the examination, it was noted that the Stewart Warner fuel level transmitters had been 
removed from the airplane and were unable to be tested with the fuel gauges at the salvage 
facility.  The manager of the Patuxent River Navy Flying Club was questioned regarding the 
disposition of the transmitters.  He stated that he had removed them from the airplane prior to 
the salvage company's arrival, and retained them for his own testing.  He further stated that 
when he removed the transmitters, he was aware of Safety Board instructions specifying that 
the airplane had not been released.
The fuel level transmitters were then shipped to the Safety Board, and tested with the fuel 
gauges.  No mechanical anomalies were noted.  
According to flight logs kept by the Patuxent River Navy Flying Club, the accident airplane was 
checked out by the pilot on July 29, 2002 at a Hobbs time of 2214.5 and returned at a Hobbs 
time of 2215.9.  An entry for 16.8 gallons of fuel was displayed on the same line, and an 
interview with a representative of the flying club revealed that aircraft are always refueled 
when they return from a flight.  Another entry on the following line of the log indicated that the 
airplane was checked out again by the pilot on the day of the accident, at a Hobbs time of 
2215.9.  The Hobbs time at the accident site was 2222.8.
A Service Bulletin (SEB99-18) was issued by the Cessna Aircraft Company on November 1, 
1999, which addressed inspections of the Stewart Warner fuel quantity indicating system.  The 
purpose of the inspections was to verify that each fuel tank gauge indicated empty when the 
fuel tank contained only unusable fuel.  The Service Bulletin stated that these inspections shall 
be accomplished within the next 100 hours of operation or 12 months, whichever came first.  
After the initial inspection, the inspection should be reaccomplished every 12 months 
thereafter.
Examination of the airplane and engine logbooks revealed no entries which addressed 
compliance with the Service Bulletin.
The pilot reported 815 hours of total flight experience, 124 of which were in fixed-wing aircraft, 
and 691 were in rotorcraft.  In addition, the pilot had accumulated 9 hours in make and model.
The weather reported at Patuxent River, at 1355, included winds from 040 degrees at 9 knots, 
visibility 7 miles, few clouds at 3,000 feet, temperature 34 degrees, and dew point 19 degrees.
Page 5 of 7IAD02LA080
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
28, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/24/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/21/2002
Flight Time:
815 hours (Total, all aircraft), 9 hours (Total, this make and model), 310 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 46 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 21 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N1177M
Model/Series:
172K 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17258677
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/18/2002, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
13 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3430 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
Samuel W Carson Jr.
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
Patuxent River Naval Flying 
Club
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7IAD02LA080
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
NHK, 39 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1355 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
34°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Myrtle Beach, SC (MYR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Patuxent River, MD (NHK)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1145 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D; Restricted Area
Airport Information
Airport:
Patuxent River NAS (NHK)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
39 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
06
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
11809 ft / 200 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
38.308333, -76.416111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jill M Andrews
Adopted Date:
11/25/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Bruce McGray; Dulles, VA
Todd Sigler; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
David Moore; Lycoming Engines; Ardsley, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7IAD02LA080
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
