Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Greene, NY
Accident Number:
ERA12LA428
Date & Time:
07/01/2012, 1530 EDT 
Registration:
N758JQ
Aircraft:
CESSNA R172K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that about 25 minutes into the flight while the airplane was at an altitude of 
about 2,300 feet mean sea level, the engine began to run rough, followed by partial loss of 
power. He turned and proceeded toward an airport then he started hearing metallic grinding 
sounds as the engine power continued to decrease. Unable to maintain altitude, he elected to 
land downwind on a runway; he noted that his airspeed was about 100 knots at the threshold. 
The main landing gear contacted the surface about midpoint of the runway, and the pilot 
pushed the control yoke to force the nose landing gear onto the runway in an intentional effort 
to stop the airplane before running off a steep embankment. The airplane came to rest upright 
about three-quarters of the way down the length of the runway, with structural damage to the 
engine firewall. 
Postaccident examination of the engine revealed the head of the No. 3 cylinder had separated 
from the barrel due to an undetected fatigue crack that emanated from corrosion pits on the 
outer surface of the barrel. Paint covering crater-shaped corrosion blisters on the barrel 
indicates that the paint was applied to a surface that had already corroded and suggests that 
the corrosion developed over an extended period of time. Although the engine had only 
accrued about 9 hours since the last 100-hour inspection, the location of the piston at top dead 
center during the compression test would have been above the location of the fracture and the 
loss of compression likely would not have been detected.
The engine manufacturer recommended that the engine be overhauled every 1500 hours or 
every 12 years. Although components of the cylinders were replaced in 1986, there was no 
record that the No. 3 cylinder had been replaced since the airplane was manufactured in 1979. 
Notably, the engine had accumulated about 1356 hours since installation and had not reached 
the manufacturer's recommended hour limit for overhaul. However, the 12-year time limit had 
been significantly exceeded and an overhaul would have involved either installing new or 
overhauled cylinders. Operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, the owner was 
not required to adhere to the manufacturer's overhaul recommendations. However, following 
both the manufacturer's recommended time and hour limitations would have likely addressed 
the fatigue cracking prior to the accident.
Page 2 of 6ERA12LA428
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
An undetected fatigue crack on the outer surface of the No. 3 cylinder barrel that could only 
have been detected visually and not by a differential compression test , resulting in separation 
of the head from the barrel and a subsequent partial loss of engine power. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's decision to land downwind on a runway that subsequently necessitated 
an intentional hard landing to avoid a runway overrun and his failure to follow the engine 
manufacturer's time between overhaul recommendation .
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng cyl section - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Scheduled/routine maintenance - Owner/builder (Factor)
Page 3 of 6ERA12LA428
Factual Information
On July 1, 2012, about 1530 eastern daylight time, a Cessna R172K, N758JQ, registered to and 
operated by a private individual, was landed hard during a forced landing at Greene Airport 
(4N7), Greene, New York. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight 
plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal flight from Becks 
Grove Airport (K16), Rome, New York, to Chenango Bridge Airport (1NK8), Binghamton, New 
York. The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the private pilot, the sole occupant was 
not injured. The flight originated from K16 about 1450.
The pilot stated that part of his preflight check included checking the engine oil quantity, which 
indicated 8 quarts (full). After takeoff, the he climbed to 4,500 feet and proceeded towards the 
destination airport. About 25 minutes into the flight, after passing 4N7, the engine began to 
run rough followed by a loss of engine power. He turned to 4N7, and then described hearing 
metallic grinding sounds, and reported the engine power continued to decrease. Unable to 
maintain altitude due to the loss of engine power, he elected to land downwind on runway 07. 
He reported that the flight was about 100 knots at the threshold, and about midpoint of the 
runway the main landing gear contacted the surface. He then pushed on the control yoke 
forcing the nose landing gear onto the runway in an effort to stop the airplane before running 
off the end down a steep embankment. The airplane came to rest upright about ¾ down the 
runway.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness 
inspector revealed damage to the lower portion of the firewall and a compression wrinkle on 
the left lower fuselage skin aft of the firewall. Examination of the engine revealed the head of 
the No. 3 cylinder assembly was separated from the barrel, which remained secured to the 
engine crankcase. The No. 3 cylinder and piston were retained for further examination.
Examination of the No. 3 cylinder and piston was by personnel of the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory located Washington, D.C. The examination of the cylinder revealed the barrel was 
fractured at the location where it intersected the cylinder head; however, the threaded end of 
the barrel remained within the cylinder head. Corrosion was observed on and between the 
cooling fins of the cylinder head, and protruding and crater shaped blisters were noted. Paint 
was noted to cover the protruding blisters and many of the crater shaped blisters. The fracture 
surface was cleaned and examination revealed two areas of relatively flat surfaces with curving 
crack arrest lines consistent with fatigue; both of which originated from corrosion pits on the 
outer surface.
There was no record that the No. 3 cylinder had been replaced since the airplane was 
manufactured in 1979, although in 1986, the engine was repaired which resulted in removal of 
the cylinders and replacement of components of the cylinders. Additionally, in 1987, the engine 
horsepower was increased from 195 to 210; no modifications to the engine powertrain were 
necessary. The engine was last inspected in accordance with a 100-Hour inspection on 
November 23, 2011, and during the inspection, differential compression testing of the cylinders 
was performed using 80 psi (standard). The entry in the engine logbook reflects that during 
testing of the No. 3 cylinder, it held 76 psi. The engine had accrued about 9 hours since the 
inspection at the time of the accident, and the airframe total time at the time of the accident 
was reported to be 1,358. The engine manufacturer recommends that the engine be overhauled 
every 1500 hours or every 12 years; the owner reported that the engine had not been 
Page 4 of 6ERA12LA428
overhauled since installation. Operating under 14 CFR Part 91, the owner was not required to 
adhere to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
 
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Miscellaneous/other
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
55
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/13/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/18/2011
Flight Time:
710 hours (Total, all aircraft), 250 hours (Total, this make and model), 651 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N758JQ
Model/Series:
R172K 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
R1723136
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/23/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
9 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1349 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-KB
Registered Owner:
PECHA JAMES C
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
PECHA JAMES C
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA12LA428
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BGM, 1636 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
248°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 20 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Rome, NY (K16)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Binghampton, NY 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1450 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Greene Airport (4N7)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
935 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
07
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2665 ft / 200 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
42.304167, -75.787222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
02/03/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
James E Welch; FAA/FSDO; Latham, NY
Publish Date:
02/03/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=84177
Page 6 of 6ERA12LA428
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
