National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Twentynine Palm, CA
Accident Number: LAX03LA044
Date & Time: 12/02/2002, 1930 PST
Registration: N50346
Aircraft: Cessna 150H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane experienced a loss of engine power  in the takeoff initial climb and impacted terrain during a forced landing.
After completing two uneventful landings, the student pilot input full throttle and began the third takeoff of the day.
Over halfway down the runway, about 75 feet above ground level, the student told the CFI that he did not think the engine was developing full power.
The CFI took over the controls and confirmed that the partial power condition.
While attempting a soft field landing, the nose landing gear impacted a bush and the airplane nosed over.
Temperatures were obtained from a weather reporting station located 14 miles west-northwest of the airport.
At 1855, the temperature was 52 degrees Fahrenheit and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
At 2000, the temperature was 48 degrees Fahrenheit and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
The temperatures and dew points were applied to an industry standard Carburetor Icing Probability Chart, and both were within the "serious icing at glide power" portion of the chart.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The improper use of carburetor heat, and the instructor's inadequate supervision which resulted in a loss of engine power due to carburetor icing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
LIGHT CONDITION - NIGHT 2.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 3.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - IMPROPER USE OF - FLIGHTCREW 4.
(C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION Factual Information On December 2, 2002, at 1930 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 150H, N50346, experienced a loss of engine power and collided with terrain during a forced landing near Twentynine Palms, California.
A private individual was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
Neither the certified flight instructor (CFI) nor the student pilot was injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed.
The local instructional flight originated at Twentynine Palms Airport about 1900.
In a written statement, the CFI stated that the purpose of the flight was for the student pilot to perform practice touch-and-go takeoffs and landings on runway 26.
After completing two uneventful landings, the student pilot input full throttle and began the third takeoff.
Over halfway down the runway, about 75 feet above ground level, the student told the CFI that he did not think the engine was developing full power.
The CFI took over the controls and confirmed the partial power condition.
He attempted to maintain altitude by pitching for best rate of climb, and began a shallow turn to the left in an effort to avoid power lines that he knew were in close proximity.
As he realized that the airplane was not able to sustain lift, the CFI configured the airplane for a soft field landing.
With the airplane approaching an airport fence, the CFI touched down.
The nose landing gear impacted a bush and the airplane nosed over.
Temperatures were obtained from MCAS Twentynine Palms, located 14 miles west-northwest from the Twentynine Palms Airport.
At 1855, the temperature was 52 degrees Fahrenheit and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
At 2000, the temperature was 48 degrees Fahrenheit and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
The temperatures were applied to an industry Carburetor Icing Probability Chart, and both recorded temperatures were within the "serious icing at glide power" portion of the chart.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
