National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Eastman, GA
Accident Number: ATL03LA022
Date & Time: 12/03/2002, 1407 EST
Registration: N289HG
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot was taxiing on the ramp for parking.
He failed to maintain a visual lookout while applying left rudder to stop a turn and inadvertently stepped on his headset cord.
His head jerked downward and he became distracted while attempting to untangle his head from the headset cord.
The airplane continued forward and collided with a hangar.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilots failure to maintain a visual lookout resulting in the subsequent on ground collision with a hangar.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - HANGAR/AIRPORT BUILDING 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 3, 2002, at 1407 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N289HG, registered and operated by Georgia Aviation and Technical College, as a 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight, experienced an on-ground collision with a hangar while taxiing for parking.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a visual flight rules flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage and the private pilot reported no injuries.
The flight originated from Augusta, Georgia, at 1300.
The pilot stated he was taxiing on the ramp after landing without a ground guide.
He taxied between a parked airplane and the hangar.
He applied left rudder to stop his turn and inadvertently stepped on his headset cord.
His head was jerked downward and he became distracted while attempting to untangle his head from the headset cord.
The airplane continued forward and collided with the hangar.
Examination of the airplane on December 5, 2002, revealed the left wing forward spar, ribs, and stringers were bent.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 20, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
