National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Soldotna, AK
Accident Number: ANC03LA016
Date & Time: 12/01/2002, 1200 AST
Registration: N270JS
Aircraft: Piper J5A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The flight departed on runway 07, and the pilot started a right climbing turn when the airplane's engine lost power.
The pilot applied carburetor heat, and checked the position of the fuel tank selector, but he could not restart the engine.
About 200 feet above ground level, he turned toward the runway.
The airplane landed hard on the runway, the left main landing gear collapsed, and the left wing struck the runway.
There were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.
The mechanic who recovered the airplane removed more than a pint of water from the right wing fuel sump.
The pilot said he fueled the airplane with 87-octane auto gas from 5-gallon cans prior to the flight.
He further said he should have strained the fuel through a water trap filter.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to remove all water from the airplane's fuel supply during the preflight inspection, which resulted in a loss of engine power and subsequent hard landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER 2.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, at the time of the accident.
The solo commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on December 9, the pilot said he had taken off on runway 07, and started a right climbing turn, when the engine lost power.
The pilot said he applied carburetor heat, and checked the position of the fuel tank selector, but he could not restart the engine.
He said he was about 200 feet above ground level, and turned toward the runway.
He said the airplane landed hard on the runway, the left main landing gear collapsed, and the left wing struck the runway.
The pilot said there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident, however, he said the mechanic who recovered the airplane removed more than a pint of water from the right wing fuel sump.
The pilot said he fueled the airplane with 87-octane auto gas from 5-gallon cans prior to the flight, and stated he should have strained the fuel through a water trap filter.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 47, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
