National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Blountstown, FL
Accident Number: MIA03CA063
Date & Time: 12/02/2002, 1430 EST
Registration: N6193V
Aircraft: Consolidated Aeronautics Inc. LA-
4-200
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane owner/pilot-rated student stated that after takeoff while flying over the Apalachicola River, the CFI advised him that he wanted to demonstrate an engine-out landing on water, and took the flight controls.
The CFI landed the airplane on the water then applied power to takeoff.
During the takeoff run and on step taxi facing a green colored buoy ahead, the CFI asked him what side of the buoy to go on.
The owner/pilot-rated student stated that he replied the left side, and the CFI maneuvered the airplane to the left, but a portion of the right wing collided with the buoy.
The airplane rotated 90 degrees to the right and came to rest.
The airplane was taxied on the river to a boat ramp where the airplane was secured.
The CFI advised him that the occurrence was an incident and not an accident, therefore; was not reportable.
The CFI stated that the training flight departed from Apalachicola Municipal Airport with the owner-operator in the left pilot seat, and himself (CFI) in the right seat.
The CFI demonstrated a power-off emergency landing on the Apalachicola River and while water taxiing approaching a marine channel marker, the aircraft encountered a rogue current or submerged object.
The airplane was turned to the right causing the right wing tip to impact the channel marker.
The aircraft was then water taxied upstream to a boat launching ramp where the airplane was taxied onto land and secured.
The occurrence was reported by the airplane owner to the NTSB on February 19, 2003.
The NTSB determined the airplane was substantially damaged and was classified an accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the certified flight instructor (CFI) to maintain clearance between the wingtip and a water marker bouy resulting in contact with the wingtip.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
OBJECT - OTHER 2.
Registration: N6193V Model/Series: LA-4-200 Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Normal Serial Number: 846 Landing Gear Type: Amphibian Seats: 4 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 10/02/2002, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
