National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chenega Bay, AK
Accident Number: ANC03LA017
Date & Time: 12/01/2002, 1530 AST
Registration: N7002Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said the airplane was parked on a remote beach on an Island.
He noticed an approaching storm, and decided to reposition the airplane on a logging road away from the beach.
During the landing roll on the logging road, the right wing struck a tree, and as the airplane turned sharply to the right, the left main landing gear struck a berm and collapsed, allowing the left wing to impact the ground.
The airplane sustained damage to both wings, the left landing gear and propeller.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for landing and his failure to maintain obstacle clearance which resulted in the airplane colliding with a tree and a berm.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - BERM 3.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The solo airline transport pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on December 9, the pilot said the accident airplane was parked on a beach in San Juan Bay, Montague Island, Alaska, when he noticed an approaching storm.
The pilot said he decided to reposition the airplane on a logging road away from the beach.
During the landing roll on the logging road, the right wing struck a tree, and as the airplane turned sharply to the right, the left main landing gear struck a berm and collapsed, allowing the left wing to impact the ground.
The airplane sustained damage to both wings, the left landing gear, and propeller.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
