Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LA JUNTA, CO
Accident Number:
DEN00LA002
Date & Time:
10/01/1999, 2006 MDT 
Registration:
N6406P
Aircraft:
Piper PA-24-250
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot and pilot-certificated passenger were on a return cross-country flight that originated 
from Washington, D.C., with a final destination of Lancaster, California.  They departed 
Missouri earlier in the day, and had planned a stop in Colorado.  While approaching Colorado's 
La Junta airport for landing, the aircraft encountered wind shifts, downdrafts and turbulent 
weather conditions.  As the pilot turned onto final approach during one of several unsuccessful 
landing attempts, the aircraft impacted the ground at an elevation of 4,500 feet msl in dark 
night conditions. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot-in-command's failure to maintain a proper altitude during final approach to landing, 
and his misjudgment of altitude clearances.  Factors were the sudden windshift, downdraft and 
turbulent weather conditions, the dark night, and the pilot's lack of familiarity with the 
geographic area. 
Page 2 of 6DEN00LA002
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - SUDDEN WINDSHIFT
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - DOWNDRAFT
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS
5. PROPER ALTITUDE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. LACK OF FAMILIARITY WITH GEOGRAPHIC AREA - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
8. ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6DEN00LA002
Factual Information
 On October 1, 1999, at 2006 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-24-250, N6406P, was 
substantially damaged when it collided with terrain while on final approach to landing at La 
Junta Municipal Airport, Junta, Colorado.  The private pilot received minor injuries, and the 
private pilot certificated passenger was seriously injured.  Night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal cross-country flight being 
conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated from Fredericktown Regional 
Airport, Fredericktown, Missouri, at 1530 central daylight time.
According to the pilot, prior to departure from Fredericktown, he received an outlook weather 
briefing from Missouri's Columbia Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS) the previous 
evening, and a standard weather briefing on the morning of the accident.  The pilot stated that 
the weather "appeared normal with 20 knot headwinds, weather clear."  While en route, he 
monitored several airport's ATIS (Automatic Terminal Information Service) reports, and the 
weather appeared "normal."  
In the pilot's accident report, he stated that while en route to La Junta, he noted the aircraft's 
groundspeed to be 113 knots with a 20 to 30 knot headwind, as indicated on his Global Position 
System (GPS) receiver.  As he approached La Junta, the wind shifted from a headwind to a 
tailwind and the GPS indicated the groundspeed to be 165 to 170 knots.  As he approached the 
airport for landing, the turbulence increased with "wind direction shifts."  He stated that he 
maintained an altitude of 5,000 feet above mean sea level (msl) while on a downwind to 
runway 8 (the airport's elevation is 4,238 feet msl; the Federal Aviation Administration 
recommends traffic pattern altitudes to be conducted at 1,000 feet above ground level [agl] 
unless otherwise specified.)  As he turned onto final approach, the aircraft encountered a 
downdraft and began to lose altitude, then impacted the ground.  During the impact sequence, 
the aircraft sustained damage to both wings, nose gear, and propeller.
Following the accident, the pilot was interviewed by the Otero County Sheriff's Department.  
The pilot stated in the interview that he and his father were on a cross-country flight that 
originated from Washington, D.C., with a final destination of Lancaster, California.  During a 
stop at La Junta, he initially attempted to land on runway 8, but the "wind was strong and [he] 
missed the runway."  He aborted the landing and was planning to return for another landing 
attempt.  He stated that he was "heading east and [was] unfamiliar with the terrain," then 
struck the ground at an elevation of 4,500 feet msl in dark night conditions.  According to the 
Sheriff's report, when asked if he had experienced any mechanical problems with the aircraft, 
he stated, "no, that it was just pilot error."  The passenger was also interviewed while in the 
hospital.  He stated that "the wind was strong and they misjudged the land around the airport."
Page 4 of 6DEN00LA002
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
53, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/17/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
690 hours (Total, all aircraft), 286 hours (Total, this make and model), 690 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 34 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 10 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N6406P
Model/Series:
PA-24-250 PA-24-250
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-1516
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/17/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
36 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4220 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-540
Registered Owner:
DANNY C. & RALPH C. OLSEN
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
DANNY C. & RALPH C. OLSEN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6DEN00LA002
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LHX, 4238 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
25 knots / 32 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
20°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
FREDERICKTOWN, MO 
(H88)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
, CO (LHX)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1530 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
LA JUNTA MUNICIPAL (LHX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4238 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
8
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6852 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
B. BEACH     SCOTT
Adopted Date:
06/21/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
RANDALL M HOLDER; DENVER, CO
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DEN00LA002
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
