National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OGDEN, UT
Accident Number: DEN01LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2000, 1627 MDT
Registration: N31078
Aircraft: Maule M-7-235B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot said that during the landing, the tail wheel 'failed.'
The airplane then ground looped and departed the right side of the runway.
The pilot was asked why the tail wheel failed, but he did not respond to inquiries.
According to the FAA inspector who examined the airplane, he saw no evidence of preimpact malfunction or failure.
He said it appeared that the pilot had made a hard landing, and that the tail wheel failed as a result of overload forces.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain a proper descent rate during landing flare/touchdown.
A factor was the tail wheel failure due to overload.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) PROPER DESCENT RATE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 2.
(F) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL - OVERLOAD ---------- Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT Factual Information On October 1, 2000, at approximately 1627 mountain daylight time, a Maule M-7-235B, N31078, registered to and operated by Chase and Baxter Investments, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain during landing at Ogden-Hinckley Airport, Ogden, Utah.
The airline transport certificated pilot and his three passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at Elko, Nevada, at approximately 1500.
According to the pilot's accident report, the airplane landed on runway 25.
During the landing roll, the tail wheel "failed."
The airplane then ground looped and departed the right side of the runway, tipping on its left side and collapsing the left main landing gear.
The left wing spar was also damaged.
The pilot was asked to explain why the tail wheel failed.
He did not respond to the request.
According to the FAA inspector who examined the airplane, he saw no evidence of preimpact malfunction or failure.
He said it appeared that the pilot had made a hard landing, and that the tail wheel had failed as a result of overload forces.
The pilot was also asked for the seating arrangement  He indicated his son-in-law occupied the left front seat.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
