National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OSHKOSH, WI
Accident Number: CHI94FA258
Date & Time: 08/01/1994, 0920 CDT
Registration: N5296C
Aircraft: KEUTHAN, CHARLES J. BUCCANEER
II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot was demonstrating the capabilities of the experimental amphibious airplane to the passenger.
The pilot reported that during the initial climb following her second water touch- and-go landing, the airplane was approaching the trees on the edge of the lake.
She attempted to turn but the airplane descended and impacted the water.
A witness reported the airplane stalled and the wing struck the water.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadvertent stall of the airplane.
Factors were the tailwind condition and the pilot's inadequate compensation for the tailwind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(F) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The commercial pilot and the sole passenger sustained minor injuries.
The business flight departed the Wittman Regional Airport, Oshkosh, Wisconsin, about 0900 and was conducted under CFR Part 91 in visual meteorological conditions.
The planned destination was the Wittman Regional Airport and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot said she was employed by the operator to give demonstration rides to potential customers.
The flight was conducted to demonstrate the capabilities of the experimental amphibious airplane to the passenger.
They departed the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) convention at Wittman Regional Airport and flew to the Vette Seaplane Base.
She flew one uneventful touch-and-go landing on the water.
Following the second touch-and- go landing, during the initial climb,  she felt like the airplane was not climbing at a normal rate.
She said all engine instruments were normal and she thought the airplane was going to impact the trees at the edge of the lake.
She attempted to turn and perform an emergency landing, but the airplane descended and impacted the water.
A witness to the accident said he saw the airplane takeoff downwind on a heading of about 210 degrees with northerly winds of about 10 knots.
He said it was approaching the trees, turned, and then stalled.
A wing tip caught in the water and the airplane spun in.
PERSONAL INFORMATION The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with a single engine land rating.
She did not hold a single engine sea rating.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The NTSB on scene investigation began about 1100.
The airplane was located on the shore at the western edge of the Vette Seaplane Base.
A witness said he helped to move the airplane up from the water and had extended the landing gear.
The front four feet of the hull was fractured circumferentially in the upward direction.
The trailing edge of the right wing was bent downward outboard of the lift struts and the right sponson was twisted.
The left forward lift strut was fractured.
The engine assembly was twisted on the mount and the fuselage mounted fuel tank was filled with water.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION Following the on scene portion of the investigation, the wreckage was released to the owner.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Flight Engineer; Military Age: 20, Female Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Instrument Airplane; None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Registration: N5296C Model/Series: BUCCANEER II BUCCANEER Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Serial Number: B2B-F036 Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Amphibian; Hull; Tailwheel Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 04/30/1994, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
: 1100 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: ROTAX ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: 382 Registered Owner: KUETHAN, CHARLES, J.
Rated Power: 65 hp Operator: KEUTHAN, CHARLES J.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
