Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Opa Locka, FL
Accident Number:
ERA16LA053
Date & Time:
12/01/2015, 1037 EST 
Registration:
N5568J
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-32
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
3 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot stated that the airplane was climbing through about 800 ft after takeoff when 
light smoke appeared from the instrument panel and windscreen area. The pilot began a turn 
back toward the airport, and, almost immediately, the engine experienced a total loss of power. 
The pilot performed an off-airport forced landing, the airplane struck a parked tractor-trailer, 
and came to rest inverted on a berm.
Subsequent examination of the airplane revealed soot and char marks on the left side of the 
engine cowling and in the engine compartment. The muffler's left sidewall displayed metal 
erosion and a wall breach that allowed exhaust gas to leak into the engine compartment. The 
engine fuel lines exhibited thermal damage but were not compromised. The front of the 
carburetor was charred, and some magneto leads were burned. The exact means by which the 
engine lost power could not be determined, but the intense heat of the exhaust gas could have 
burned off fuel in the carburetor, created a vapor lock in the fuel lines, or interrupted spark to 
the cylinders.
Further examination of the muffler revealed that the right sidewall was thin and rusted and 
had small erosion holes. The accident occurred less than 8 hours of operation after the 
airplane's most recent annual/100-hour inspection. Manufacturer-mandated inspection 
criteria required particular attention be paid to the exhaust system, especially fatigue-prone 
areas such as the muffler sidewalls. Given the degree of preexisting deterioration noted, it is 
likely that the exhaust system was not properly inspected during the last inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6ERA16LA053
Maintenance personnel's inadequate inspection of the exhaust system, which resulted in the 
escape of exhaust gases into the engine compartment and a subsequent total loss of engine 
power.
Findings
Aircraft
Engine exhaust - Inadequate inspection (Cause)
Engine exhaust - Failure (Cause)
Engine exhaust - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Personnel issues
Scheduled/routine inspection - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ERA16LA053
Factual Information
On December 1, 2015, at 1037 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-32-260, N5568J, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing shortly after taking off from Opa Locka 
Executive Airport (KOPF), Miami, Florida. The private pilot and two passengers sustained 
serious injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules flight plan 
had been filed for the flight to South Bimini Airport (MYBS), South Bimini, The Bahamas. The 
personal flight was operating under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
According to the pilot, as the airplane was climbing through about 800 feet, the front seat 
passenger asked him if he smelled something. The pilot stated that he did and they both then 
saw "light smoke up around the dash and windshield area." The pilot commenced a turn back 
toward the airport, and almost immediately, the engine experienced a total loss of power. The 
pilot advised the airport tower controller of the problem, but realizing that the airplane could 
not make it back to the airport, performed a forced landing off-airport.
According to the responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the airplane 
first touched down on top of a parked tractor trailer, bounced over a canal, and came to rest 
upside down on a berm.
The airplane was recovered to a storage facility where it was subsequently examined with 
NTSB oversight. There, soot and char marks, along with thermal damage, were noted on the 
left side of the cowling, both on the engine compartment side and the external side.
The left (pilot) side wall of the muffler exhibited metal erosion and was fractured completely 
around the area where the combined cylinder exhaust pipe attached to the muffler. There were 
also fractures and bent metal consistent with impact damage. In addition, there was dark 
staining in the area of the fractures, inboard to cover about 50% of the top of the muffler. Dark 
staining was additionally noted on the combined cylinder exhaust pipe, most notably near the 
muffler, and also on the No. 2 (left side, most forward) cylinder intake riser, particularly just 
above and facing the combined cylinder exhaust pipe.
In addition, the valve covers on the left side of the engine displayed thermal darkening on the 
lower portions of the covers. The engine fuel lines exhibited thermal damage, but were not 
compromised. The front of the carburetor was charred. The ignition wires on the left side of the 
engine were charred, with most having lost sections of insulation. Engine crankshaft continuity 
and cylinder compression were confirmed.
The right side wall of the muffler was also stained, and the metal was thin and rusted, with 
small erosion holes.
According to airplane engine and airframe logbooks, the Lycoming O-540E4B5 engine 
underwent a major overhaul in December 2002, and its installation on the airframe was noted 
on December 18, 2002, at 0 hours tachometer time. On January 11, 2005, at 122.6 hours 
tachometer time, the exhaust gaskets were replaced and new hardware was installed.
Page 4 of 6ERA16LA053
According to the airframe logbook, the airplane's most recent annual/100-hour inspection was 
completed on June 17, 2015, at 468.8 hours tachometer time. The same mechanic had 
completed the last three annual/100-hour inspections; no exhaust system anomalies were 
noted during those inspections. The accident occurred at 476.0 tachometer hours.
According to the Piper PA-32-260/300 Service Manual, "A very thorough inspection of the 
entire exhaust system, including heat exchange shroud, muffler, muffler baffles, stack and all 
exhaust connections must be accomplished at each 100 hour inspection." (The service manual 
also described how to inspect the exhaust system and alternative means to inspect it. It also 
provided a figure that showed typical muffler fatigue areas that included the muffler side walls.
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 91-59A, "Inspection and Care of General Aviation Aircraft Exhaust 
Systems" emphasizes "the safety hazards of poorly maintained aircraft exhaust systems 
(reciprocating powerplants) and highlights points at which exhaust system failures occur. 
Further, it provides information on the kinds of problems to be expected and recommends 
pilots perform ongoing preventive maintenance and mechanics perform maintenance."
The AC also notes that potential failures can include leakage of exhaust gas into the cabin, 
partial or full engine power loss, or impingement heating or torching of surrounding 
structures.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Fire/smoke (non-impact)
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
72, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/28/2015
Flight Time:
1786 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1710 hours (Total, this make and model), 5 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA16LA053
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N5568J
Model/Series:
PA-32 260
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1968
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32-1032
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/17/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
7 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6019 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-540 SERIES
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OPF, 8 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1541 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
120째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
70째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26째C / 23째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Rain; No Obscuration
Departure Point: 
Opa Locka, FL (KOPF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
South Bimini, AO (MYBS)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1034 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
Opa Locka (KOPF)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
8 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
12
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6800 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6ERA16LA053
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
In-Flight
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
25.897222, -80.089167 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
05/01/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Roberto Rodriguez; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Publish Date:
05/01/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92382
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
