The main landing gear collapsed during landing rollout.  The pilot reported that when he 
selected 'gear down' the in-transit light illuminated and when the landing gear had extended 
the three landing gear position lights illuminated.  The pilot reported the in-transit light did 
not remain illuminated after the landing gear had extended.  The pilot stated there was "no 
gear warning indication or horn sounding."  The pilot reported a normal landing was made and 
prior to the first taxiway both main landing gear collapsed.  The pilot stated when the main 
landing gear collapsed the in-transit light illuminated and landing gear warning horn sounded.  
The pilot reported the three landing gear position lights remained illuminated after the aircraft 
came to rest.  The airplane was elevated for an operational test of the landing gear.  During 
normal gear extension the nose and right main landing gear extended as designed.  The left 
main landing gear extended approximately 3/4 down before becoming mechanically bound.  
The nose and right main landing gear position lights illuminated.  The left main landing gear 
position light did not illuminate.  The left main landing gear could be forced into the down-
and-locked position and the gear position light would illuminate.  The linkage between the left 
oleo strut assembly and the gear was corroded and dirt was present on the landing gear 
position switches.  The linkage was disconnected and the left main landing gear moved freely.
The mechanical binding of the left main landing gear, which resulted in the left main landing 
gear not fully extending to the down-and-locked position.  Factors to the accident were the 
oleo-strut linkage being corroded and the contamination of the gear position switches.
On December 1, 2002, at 1138 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-34-200, N15723, piloted by a 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when the landing gear collapsed while landing 
on runway 18 (5,500 feet by 100 feet, dry/asphalt) at the Clark County Airport (JVY), 
Jeffersonville, Indiana.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  
The flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  The 
flight departed the Bowman Field Airport (LOU), Louisville, Kentucky, at 1045.
According to the pilot's written statement, when he selected 'gear down' the in-transit light 
illuminated and when the landing gear had extended the three landing gear position lights 
illuminated.  The pilot reported the in-transit light did not remain illuminated after the landing 
gear had extended.  The pilot stated there was "no gear warning indication or horn sounding."  
The pilot reported a normal landing was made and prior to the first taxiway both main landing 
gear collapsed.  The pilot stated when the main landing gear collapsed the in-transit light 
illuminated and landing gear warning horn sounded.  The aircraft came to rest at the 
intersection of runways 18 and 32.  The pilot reported the three landing gear position lights 
remained illuminated after the aircraft came to rest.
The airplane was elevated for an operational test of the landing gear.  During normal gear 
extension the nose and right main landing gear extended as designed.  The left main landing 
gear extended approximately 3/4 down before becoming mechanically bound.  The nose and 
right main landing gear position lights illuminated.  The left main landing gear position light 
did not illuminate.  The left main landing gear could be forced into the down-and-locked 
position and the gear position light would illuminate.  The linkage between the left oleo strut 
assembly and the gear was corroded and dirt was present on the landing gear position 
switches.  The linkage was disconnected and the left main landing gear moved freely.
