The airplane experienced a loss of engine power  in the takeoff initial climb and impacted 
terrain during a forced landing.  After completing two uneventful landings, the student pilot 
input full throttle and began the third takeoff of the day.  Over halfway down the runway, about 
75 feet above ground level, the student told the CFI that he did not think the engine was 
developing full power.  The CFI took over the controls and confirmed that the partial power 
condition.  While attempting a soft field landing, the nose landing gear impacted a bush and 
the airplane nosed over.  Temperatures were obtained from a weather reporting station located 
14 miles west-northwest of the airport.  At 1855, the temperature was 52 degrees Fahrenheit 
and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.  At 2000, the temperature was 48 degrees 
Fahrenheit and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.  The temperatures and dew points 
were applied to an industry standard Carburetor Icing Probability Chart, and both were within 
the "serious icing at glide power" portion of the chart.
The improper use of carburetor heat, and the instructor's inadequate supervision which 
resulted in a loss of engine power due to carburetor icing.
On December 2, 2002, at 1930 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 150H, N50346, experienced a 
loss of engine power and collided with terrain during a forced landing near Twentynine Palms, 
California.  A private individual was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91.  Neither the certified flight instructor (CFI) nor the student pilot was injured; the airplane 
sustained substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan 
had not been filed.  The local instructional flight originated at Twentynine Palms Airport about 
1900.
In a written statement, the CFI stated that the purpose of the flight was for the student pilot to 
perform practice touch-and-go takeoffs and landings on runway 26.  After completing two 
uneventful landings, the student pilot input full throttle and began the third takeoff.  Over 
halfway down the runway, about 75 feet above ground level, the student told the CFI that he 
did not think the engine was developing full power.  The CFI took over the controls and 
confirmed the partial power condition.  He attempted to maintain altitude by pitching for best 
rate of climb, and began a shallow turn to the left in an effort to avoid power lines that he knew 
were in close proximity.
As he realized that the airplane was not able to sustain lift, the CFI configured the airplane for 
a soft field landing.  With the airplane approaching an airport fence, the CFI touched down.  
The nose landing gear impacted a bush and the airplane nosed over.
Temperatures were obtained from MCAS Twentynine Palms, located 14 miles west-northwest 
from the Twentynine Palms Airport.  At 1855, the temperature was 52 degrees Fahrenheit and 
the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.  At 2000, the temperature was 48 degrees 
Fahrenheit and the dew point was 32 degrees Fahrenheit.  The temperatures were applied to an 
industry Carburetor Icing Probability Chart, and both recorded temperatures were within the 
"serious icing at glide power" portion of the chart.
