The helicopter experienced a loss of engine power and landed hard during an autorotation, 
severing the tail boom.  The number 6 cylinder's intake valve separated, with the valve's head 
wedged in the intake valve seat bore.  Removal of the rocker box cover on that cylinder revealed 
that the spring retainer was broken into numerous pieces.  The piston head showed over 15 
impressions consistent in dimension to that of the valve head.  After examining the number 6 
cylinder, a metallurgist determined that the valve failed in between the intake valve head and 
the valve stem.
separation of the no. 6 cylinder intake valve head from the valve stem, which resulted in a loss 
of engine power.  The mechanism responsible for the valve failure is unknown.
On December 1, 2002, about 1310 Pacific standard time, a Bell 47G-3B-1, N48020, experienced 
a loss of engine power and landed hard during an autorotation near Panaca, Nevada.  The 
Bureau of Land Management was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91.  The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the helicopter sustained 
substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company flight plan had 
been filed.  The local public use positioning flight originated from Caliente, Nevada, about 
1200.
The pilot was positioning the helicopter to perform a horse herding operation for the Bureau of 
Land Management at the time of the accident.  Two witnesses reported seeing two grey smoke 
emissions from the engine prior to a loss of engine power and hard landing, severing the tail 
boom.
In a written statement, the mechanic who regularly preformed the maintenance on the 
helicopter, reported that earlier in the year the helicopter underwent a 1,000-hour engine 
inspection, which included an engine overhaul; it was returned to service on April 30, 2002.  
The cylinder assemblies used for the overhaul were purchased from Engine Components, Inc., 
in San Antonio, Texas.  The maintenance tag attached on the cylinders attested that "the repair 
made to the unit listed on reverse side was made and inspected in accordance with current 
regulations of the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] and the part is Airworthy and 
approved for return to service."
The mechanic further stated that he conducted an engine examination after the accident under 
the supervision of the FAA.  Upon removal of the induction tubes and the induction manifold, 
the mechanic discovered internal discoloration similar to that for the exhaust tubes.  He 
removed the number 6 cylinder and noted that the intake valve was broken, with the valve's 
head wedged in the intake valve seat bore.  Removal of the rocker box cover on that cylinder 
revealed that the spring retainer was broken into numerous pieces. The piston head showed 
over 15 impressions consistent in dimensions to that of the valve head.
The mechanic added that at the time of the accident, the cylinder had accumulated 10 hours 
since overhaul and the engine had accumulated 110.3 hours since the last overhaul.  The 
cylinder was sent to Engine Components, Inc., for further examination under the auspice of the 
FAA.  The mechanic's complete written account is appended to this report in the public docket.
Engine Components, Inc., completed a technical report in summation of their findings.  In 
pertinent part, the director of quality and metallurgy stated that the retainer failed due to 
overload.  He opined that during engine operation the valve fractured first, resulting in the 
valve stem impacting the retainer and keys leading to their facture and deformation.  He noted 
that the broken valve was a new part supplied by Lycoming during the cylinder overhaul.  The 
complete report is appended to the report in the public docket.
