The flight departed on runway 07, and the pilot started a right climbing turn when the 
airplane's engine lost power.  The pilot applied carburetor heat, and checked the position of the 
fuel tank selector, but he could not restart the engine.  About 200 feet above ground level, he 
turned toward the runway.  The airplane landed hard on the runway, the left main landing gear 
collapsed, and the left wing struck the runway.  There were no known mechanical anomalies 
with the airplane prior to the accident.  The mechanic who recovered the airplane removed 
more than a pint of water from the right wing fuel sump. The pilot said he fueled the airplane 
with 87-octane auto gas from 5-gallon cans prior to the flight.  He further said he should have 
strained the fuel through a water trap filter.
The pilot's failure to remove all water from the airplane's fuel supply during the preflight 
inspection, which resulted in a loss of engine power and subsequent hard landing.
On December 1, 2002, about 1200 Alaska standard time, a Piper J5A airplane, N270JS, 
sustained substantial damage when the main landing gear collapsed during an emergency 
landing following a loss of engine power at the Soldotna Airport, Soldotna, Alaska.  The 
airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR 
Part 91, at the time of the accident.  The solo commercial pilot was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on December 9, the pilot said he had taken off on runway 07, and 
started a right climbing turn, when the engine lost power.  The pilot said he applied carburetor 
heat, and checked the position of the fuel tank selector, but he could not restart the engine.  He 
said he was about 200 feet above ground level, and turned toward the runway.  He said the 
airplane landed hard on the runway, the left main landing gear collapsed, and the left wing 
struck the runway.  The pilot said there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane 
prior to the accident, however, he said the mechanic who recovered the airplane removed more 
than a pint of water from the right wing fuel sump.  The pilot said he fueled the airplane with 
87-octane auto gas from 5-gallon cans prior to the flight, and stated he should have strained 
the fuel through a water trap filter.
