According to the pilot, he had moved approximately 80 bags of seismic sensor cable earlier that 
morning with no problems. At approximately 1120, the pilot stopped operations to change 
lines. He proceeded to pick up five bags and was en route to the drop off point. During the 
approach to the north, the pilot "noticed that the Nr (rotor rpm) was high at roughly 400 rpm 
as [he] turned to the west." As the pilot slowed down, he added collective to reduce the rotor 
speed. The rotor rpm began to slow, at which point the pilot lowered the collective and applied 
forward cyclic to maintain forward airspeed. The rotor speed continued to decrease and the 
"low rotor speed warning horn" sounded. The pilot lowered the collective and flared, at which 
point the bags contacted the ground. The pilot then "noticed that the Nr was low" at 
approximately 320 rpm. The pilot "zeroed the airspeed, pumped the collective once[,] trying to 
slow the rate of decent and pulled up on the collective," just before impacting the ground. The 
helicopter settled onto the load beneath it, and subsequently rolled over on its right side 
causing substantial damage. An examination of the helicopter revealed no anomalies.
the pilot's failure to maintain rotor rpm.  A related factor was the presence of an object in the 
path during the touchdown.
On December 2, 2002, at approximately 1125 mountain standard time, an Aerospatiale AS-
350BA, N20840, operated by Crew Concepts Inc., was substantially damaged following an 
autorotation and subsequent landing rollover 1 mile east of Monticello, Utah. The commercial 
pilot, the sole occupant on board, received minor injuries. The external load operation was 
being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 133. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local geophysical flight that 
originated approximately 5 minutes prior to the accident. 
According to the pilot, he had moved approximately 80 bags earlier that morning with no 
problems. The bags contained seismic sensor cables. At approximately 1120, the pilot stopped 
operations to change lines. He proceeded to pick up five bags and was en route to the drop off 
point. During the approach to the north, the pilot "noticed that the Nr [rotor rpm] was high at 
roughly 400 rpm as [he] turned to the west." As the forward speed slowed down, the pilot 
added collective to reduce the rotor speed. The rotor rpm began to slow but continued to 
decrease, at which point the pilot lowered the collective and applied forward cyclic to maintain 
forward airspeed. The rotor speed continued to decrease and the "low rotor speed warning 
horn" sounded. The pilot lowered the collective and flared, at which point the bags contacted 
the ground. The pilot then "noticed that the Nr was low" at approximately 320 rpm. Impact 
with the ground was unavoidable and the pilot "zeroed the airspeed, pumped the collective 
once[,] trying to slow the rate of decent and pulled up on the collective," just before impacting 
the ground.
The helicopter settled onto the load on the ground. Subsequently, the helicopter rolled over, 
coming to rest on its right side. The tail boom was severed, the engine and transmission were 
separated, and the main rotor blades and hub assembly were destroyed. 
On March 6, 2003, the fuel control unit was examined at Turbomeca, Grand Prairie, Texas.  No 
anomalies were reported. An examination of the helicopter's systems revealed no anomalies.
The calculated density altitude at the accident site was 7,443 feet.  The helicopter's maximum 
substantiated pressure altitude is 16,000 feet.
