National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: JASPER, TX
Accident Number: FTW96LA142
Date & Time: 03/02/1996, 1715 CST
Registration: N8642S
Aircraft: Cessna 150F
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, she had just landed after a local flight with a passenger.
While taxiing toward the terminal, a person, who was standing on the ramp, adjacent to the taxiway, approached the airplane from the left (pilot's) side.
The pilot then stopped the airplane, idled the engine, and had a brief conversation with the person.
During the conversation, the pilot agreed to embark the person after her current passenger exited the airplane, and take the person for a short flight.
While conversing, the person was located aft of the left wing strut, and the pilot's door was open.
Several spectators, who were observing the activity from the ramp area, reported that after the conversation with the pilot, the person turned to wave at them, and then walked into the propeller.
A factor relating to the accident was: the other person diverted his attention to spectators, who were standing nearby.
Findings Occurrence #1: PROPELLER/ROTOR CONTACT TO PERSON Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) OPERATING Findings 1.
(C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) UNSAFE/HAZARDOUS CONDITION - DISREGARDED - OTHER PERSON 3.
Visual meteorological  conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The rental  airplane sustained minor damaged, and the private pilot-in- command and one passenger were not injured.
The person who  contacted the propeller sustained serious injuries.
The personal  flight was intended to embark the potential passenger, and fly in  the local area.
According to the pilot, she had just landed after a local sight- seeing flight with a passenger.
As she was taxiing toward the  terminal, a person, who was standing on the ramp adjacent to the taxiway, approached the airplane from the left (pilot's) side.
She then stopped the airplane, idled the engine, and had a brief  conversation with the person who approached the airplane.
During  the conversation, the pilot agreed to embark the person after her  current passenger got out of the airplane, and go for a short  flight in the local area.
During the conversation, the person  was located aft of the left wing strut.
Several spectators, who were observing the activity from the ramp  area, reported that, after the conversation with the pilot, the  person turned to wave at them, and then walked into the propeller.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 18, Female Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
