National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CHIEFLAND, FL
Accident Number: MIA96LA088
Date & Time: 03/01/1996, 1515 EST
Registration: N6248X
Aircraft: Bell 206L4
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot stated that during cruise flight about 400 feet mean sea level he heard the engine decelerate then heard the engine-out audio.
He maneuvered the helicopter for an autorotative landing in a clearing, but after observing uneven terrain he elected to zero his forward airspeed.
After a hard landing the helicopter rocked forward causing the main rotor blades to contact the tailboom.
Fuel quantity was sufficient to sustain engine operation and visually no contaminants were noted.
The helicopter was recovered and the engine was started several times using the fuel supply in the fuel tank with no discrepancies noted.
The engine was removed from the helicopter and tested at the manufacturers facility with no discrepancies noted.
The power turbine governor (PTG) and the main fuel control and engine driven fuel pump were removed for bench testing.
The only discrepancy noted was a failed roll pin for the throttle level stop in the PTG.
The PTG manufacturer states that the failed roll pin would not effect operation of the unit.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Improper cyclic and collective input by the pilot-in-command resulting in the hard landing during the autorotative landing.
Contributing to the accident was the total loss of engine power due to undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(F) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
(C) CYCLIC - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 business flight.
The commercial-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight originated about 1300 central standard time from the Marianna Municipal Airport, Marianna, Florida.
The pilot stated that during cruise flight about 400 feet mean sea level, in VMC, he first heard the engine decelerate then heard the engine out audio announcement.
He verified that the throttle was full open then lowered the collective control for an autorotative landing.
He observed a clearing and initiated a 180-degree turn but when the flight was near the ground, he observed uneven terrain and elected to zero his forward speed.
The helicopter then landed hard and rocked forward, causing the main rotor blades to contact the tailboom.
The helicopter had been operated for about 1.3 hours since fueling and a total of 74.8 hours since manufacture.
Postaccident examination of the helicopter by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed sufficient fuel to sustain engine operation.
Visual examination of a sample of fuel obtained from the fuel tank revealed no evidence of contamination.
The helicopter was recovered and the engine was started and operated several times using the fuel supply in the fuel tank with no discrepancies noted.
Vacuum test of the fuel system revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.
The engine was removed from the helicopter for further tests.
The engine was placed in a test stand at the manufacturer's facility and operated with no discrepancies noted.
The engine-driven fuel pump with attached main fuel control and the power turbine governor (PTG) were removed and sent to the manufacturer's facility for bench tests which revealed no failure or malfunction that would have prevented normal engine operation.
The only discrepancy noted was a sheared PTG throttle lever stop roll pin.
According to Allied Signal personnel, failure of the roll pin has previously been determined to occur due to over torque of the outer lever attachment nut.
The failure did not affect operation of the throttle input from the cockpit.
Review of the helicopter historical records revealed that the power turbine governor was installed on 12/15/95, and had accumulated 70.5 hours since new.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 4450 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time: 72 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: 250-C30P Registered Owner: BELL HELICOPTER TEXTRON, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
