National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CHANDLER, OK
Accident Number: FTW96LA137
Date & Time: 03/02/1996, 0823 CST
Registration: N312RS
Aircraft: Bell B206-BIII
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During an approach to a pre-selected area, while at approximately 100 yards from the landing site, at an airspeed of 20 knots, the pilot elected to execute a go-around, when he concluded that his approach was too steep and too fast.
The pilot told an FAA inspector that the engine lost power during the go-around sequence, and while attempting to land on another clear area about 150 yards from the previously selected spot, the helicopter landed hard.
The pilot further stated that 'the tailboom impacted the ground first, followed by the aft portion of the skids, which impacted the ground vertically.'
The reason for the reported loss of engine power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the reported loss of engine power during a go-around for undetermined reason(s).
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
Visual Meteorological Conditions prevailed for the personal flight for which a flight plan was not filed.
The pilot sustained minor injuries and his passenger was not injured.
The flight originated from Tulsa, Oklahoma, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.
In the narrative portion of the enclosed NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated that he selected a clear grassy area adjacent to the lodge's parking lot, which he intended to land on.
During his approach to the pre-selected area, while at approximately 100 yards from the landing site, at an airspeed of 20 knots, the pilot elected to execute a go-around when he concluded that his approach was too steep and too fast.
The pilot told the FAA inspector that the engine lost power during the go-around sequence, and while attempting to land on another clear area about 150 yards from the previously selected spot, the helicopter landed hard.
The pilot further stated that "the tailboom impacted the ground first, followed by the aft portion of the skids, which impacted the ground vertically."
A post-impact fire destroyed the helicopter within seconds after coming to rest.
The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
On the enclosed report, the pilot stated that he had accumulated a total of 112.3 flight hours in rotorcraft, of which 28.4 were in the Bell 206 (17.7 within the preceding 90 days).
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
