National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: COOPER LANDING, AK
Accident Number: ANC96LA028
Date & Time: 03/02/1996, 1300 AST
Registration: N6058D
Aircraft: PIPER PA-22
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot landed on a remote, ice covered lake in a tundra tire equipped airplane.
The lake was covered by hard packed snow.
During the landing roll out, a tire broke through a soft spot on the snow surface.
The airplane nosed over and received damage to the wing lift struts and rudder.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for landing.
Soft snow conditions were a factor in the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 3.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On March 2, 1996, about 1300 Alaska standard time, a tundra tire equipped Piper PA-22, N6058D, crashed during landing about 19 miles south of Cooper Landing, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight when the accident occurred.
The airplane, registered to and operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage.
The certificated airline transport pilot and the sole passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight originated at Merrill Field, Anchorage, Alaska, about 1130.
The pilot reported that he was landing on Iceberg Lake that was covered by hard packed snow.
After landing to the east, the airplane was rolling out and encountered a soft spot on the snow surface.
The airplane nosed over and received damage to the wing lift struts and rudder.
The pilot and passenger were rescued from the scene on March 3, 1996, about 0200.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
