National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PITTSBURG, KS
Accident Number: CHI96LA101
Date & Time: 03/01/1996, 1800 CST
Registration: N95394
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-140
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that she and her passenger became incapacitated after takeoff.
The airplane impacted the terrain.
Both occupants were hospitalized for observation and testing for carbon monoxide.
Tests were positive for carbon monoxide.
A subsequent examination of the muffler system found holes in the muffler.
An annual inspection had been performed 4 flight-hours prior to the accident, on 2/20/96.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: an inadequate annual inspection by maintenance personnel, a deteriorated muffler, and pilot incapacitation due to carbon monoxide.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) EXHAUST SYSTEM,MUFFLER - DETERIORATED 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,ANNUAL INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 3.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The pilot and one passenger reported no injuries.
The local flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
No flight plan was on file.
The flight was on departure at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that both she and her passenger experienced periods of incapacitation during the accident sequence.
Although neither occupant of the airplane sustained any injuries due to the impact both were hospitalized for observation and testing for carbon monoxide.
The tests were positive and the results are attached to this report.
Subsequent to the accident an examination of the exhaust system of the accident airplane was conducted.
Three holes were found in the exterior of the muffler shroud.
When removed, additional holes were found in the muffler itself.
An annual inspection of the airplane had been conducted four hours prior to the accident on February 20, 1996.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Female Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2150 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 4 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2085 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320-E3D Registered Owner: JAMES A.
& PARTICIA A. KIRBY Rated Power: 150 hp Operator: JAMES A.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
