Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
POINT LAY, AK
Accident Number:
ANC99LA014
Date & Time:
12/03/1998, 1038 AST 
Registration:
N3542H
Aircraft:
Piper PA-31
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
A witness observed the airplane circle to land at the completion of an NDB approach. The 
nighttime meteorological conditions were an 800 feet ceiling, 1 mile visibility in blowing snow, 
and 26 knot winds. The surrounding terrain was essentially flat, snow covered, and featureless. 
The witness saw the airplane on final approach misaligned for the runway, and then disappear 
below an 18 feet msl bluff. He transmitted on the radio to 'get out of there,' and heard no 
response. About 10 minutes later the accident pilot walked up to the witness' airplane. The 
pilot told the investigator-in-charge that he was 'beat around by the winds, ...it was snowing 
pretty hard, I always had the lights, and I was concentrating on the runway. The next thing I 
knew I was on the ground short of the runway.' The pilot's previous experience to this airport 
was during daytime, and during visual conditions. The airport, which was being transferred 
from the Air Force to the North Slope Borough, has medium intensity runway lights (MIRL), 
and runway end identifier lights (REILS). It does not have visual approach slope indicator 
(VASI) lights. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Failure of the pilot to maintain a proper glidepath. Factors associated with this accident were 
the airport not having a VASI system installed, and the lack of visual perception for the pilot. 
Page 2 of 6ANC99LA014
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - FAF/OUTER MARKER TO THRESHOLD (IFR)
Findings
1. TERRAIN CONDITION - TUNDRA
2. WEATHER CONDITION - SNOW
3. WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
4. LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - FAF/OUTER MARKER TO THRESHOLD (IFR)
Findings
5. (C) PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (F) VASI - NOT AVAILABLE - OTHER GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL
7. (F) VISUAL/AURAL PERCEPTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6ANC99LA014
Factual Information
 On December 3, 1998, at 1038 Alaska standard time, a Piper PA-31 airplane, N3542H, 
sustained substantial damage when it collided with terrain about 1,500 feet short of runway 05 
at the Point Lay Long Range Radar Site, Point Lay, Alaska. The solo airline transport pilot 
received minor injuries. The airplane was operated by Cape Smythe Air Service, Inc., of 
Barrow, Alaska, as a 14 CFR Part 91 positioning flight for an on-demand air charter. The flight 
departed Kotzebue, Alaska, at 0919, for Point Lay. Night, instrument meteorological conditions 
(IMC) prevailed at the time of the accident, and the flight was operating on an Instrument 
Flight Rules (IFR) flight plan.
The pilot was in contact with the Anchorage Air Route Traffic Control Center, and had been 
cleared for the NDB (nondirectional beacon) Runway 05 approach. Runway 05 is 3,519 feet 
long, and 80 feet wide.  It is equipped with medium intensity runway lights (MIRL), and 
runway end identifier lights (REILS). The airport, which was in the process of transfer from the 
Air Force to the North Slope Borough, does not have visual approach slope indicator (VASI) 
lights. The airport is located about 1,000 feet inland from the shoreline of the Chuckchi Sea, 
which was frozen and covered with snow. The terrain surrounding Point Lay is essentially level 
and featureless. 
The pilot of an airplane holding for departure clear of the approach end of runway 05 
witnessed the accident. He told the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) that the weather when 
he landed 20 minutes prior to the accident was a ceiling of 800 feet overcast, winds from the 
northeast, and visibility of 1 3/4 miles in blowing snow. He transmitted to the pilot of the 
accident airplane that there was low weather of 800 feet overcast, one mile visibility, and winds 
from the east at 26 knots. 
The witness pilot told the IIC that he heard the accident airplane go over the NDB and then call 
outbound on the radio. Several minutes later he watched the airplane's lights go over the 
hangar on the south side of the runway at between 300 feet and 500 feet above the ground. He 
then observed the airplane circle to the left over the airport, and turn downwind. He lost sight 
of the airplane, and then saw it again, low, about one mile away, coming right at him. He 
described the airplane being misaligned for the runway. The lights of the airplane disappeared 
below a bluff (which is 18 feet above sea level) located between the runway and the shoreline, 
then reappeared. The witness transmitted on the radio to get out of there, then the lights again 
disappeared. He heard no more transmissions, and after about 10 minutes, the accident pilot 
walked up to the witness' airplane.
The NTSB IIC listened to a certified tape recording of the radio transmissions, and heard the 
witness pilot transmit on 118.9 MHz "get out of there, get out of there."
The accident pilot told the NTSB IIC during a telephone interview on December 4, 1998, and 
wrote in his pilot/operator report, that during the final segment of the NDB approach, he was 
beat around by the winds, saw the field about two miles out, and saw he was off course. He 
decided to circle to land. The pilot said it was snowing pretty hard, he always had the lights, 
and he was concentrating on the runway. The next thing he knew he was on the ground short of 
the runway. The pilot stated he believed he started his descent on final, and because of the 
darkness and snow covered, featureless terrain, it was not possible to differentiate the ground 
from the frozen ocean. The airplane was not accumulating ice, and the windows were clear. He 
said there were no mechanical problems with the airplane, and that it was running good. 
Page 4 of 6ANC99LA014
The accident pilot said he had been to Point Lay on a couple of occasions, in the daytime, a 
couple of months earlier. He said he had executed the approach procedure before, but it may 
have been in visual conditions. He was hired by the company on February 9, 1998. He received 
his initial training in the Cessna 207. He was trained in the PA-31 in July 1998.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/13/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3069 hours (Total, all aircraft), 311 hours (Total, this make and model), 2556 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 298 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 88 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N3542H
Model/Series:
PA-31 PA-31
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
31-7952233
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/07/1998, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7368 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
77 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
15638 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
LTIO-540-32B
Registered Owner:
CAPE SMYTHE AIR SERVICE, 
INC.
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
CAPE SMYTHE AIR SERVICE, 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Commuter Air Carrier 
(135); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
CSAA
Page 5 of 6ANC99LA014
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
1 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
26 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
KOTZEBUE, AK (OTZ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (PIZ)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0919 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
POINT LAY LRRS (PIZ)
Runway Surface Type:
Gravel
Airport Elevation:
20 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Snow--dry
Runway Used:
5
IFR Approach:
ADF/NDB
Runway Length/Width:
3519 ft / 80 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MATTHEW    L THOMAS
Adopted Date:
02/16/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
JOHN   GAMBLE(FAA FSDO); FAIRBANKS, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC99LA014
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
