Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Duchesne, UT
Accident Number:
DEN05LA131
Date & Time:
09/02/2005, 1240 MDT 
Registration:
N220SH
Aircraft:
Aerospatiale SA315B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
During a helicopter external load operation, the pilot was attempting to lift a 1,500 pound drill 
rig that was attached to the end of a 75-foot long line at a terrain elevation of approximately 
7,000 feet msl.  As the drill was being lifted off the ground, the helicopter "suddenly [and] 
violently accelerated (pitched) down [and] left."  The pilot attempted to correct the 
uncommanded movement by applying right aft cyclic; however, the helicopter began a "rapid 
spin to the left."  A ground witness observed the helicopter complete 3 or 4, 360-degree 
rotations.  The pilot then closed the throttle to the flight idle position, and the left rotation 
stopped.  The helicopter entered a descent toward the terrain with approximately 10 knots of 
forward airspeed. Approximately 30-40 feel above ground level (agl), the pilot pulled the 
"remaining" collective to slow the descent and rotor RPM. The helicopter's main rotor blades 
contacted trees, and subsequently the helicopter came to rest on its right side.  During the 
accident sequence, the pilot did not jettison the external load.  The pilot reported the wind 
conditions as "calm" and the temperature 71 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of the accident.  
Examination of the airframe, systems, and a functional test of the engine revealed no 
anomalies.  The reason for the loss of control was not determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the loss of control during external load operations for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6DEN05LA131
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. REMEDIAL ACTION - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6DEN05LA131
Factual Information
On September 2, 2005, approximately 1240 mountain daylight time, an Aerospatiale SA315B, 
single-engine helicopter, N220SH, operated by Skydance Northwestern, Inc., Minden, Nevada, 
was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain following a loss of control during an 
external load operation approximately 11 miles southwest of the Duchesne Municipal Airport 
(U69), Duchesne, Utah.  The airline transport pilot, sole occupant of the helicopter, was not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The flight was 
being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 133 without a flight plan.  The flight departed a 
remote landing zone near Duchesne, Utah, approximately 1200.    
According to the pilot, he was attempting to lift a 1,500 pound drill rig that was attached to the 
end of a 75-foot long line at a terrain elevation of approximately 7,000 feet msl.  As the drill 
was being lifted off the ground, the helicopter "suddenly [and] violently accelerated (pitched) 
down [and] left."  The pilot attempted to correct the uncommanded movement by applying 
right aft cyclic; however, the helicopter began a "rapid spin to the left."  A ground witness 
observed the helicopter complete 3 or 4, 360-degree rotations.  The pilot then closed the 
throttle to the flight idle position, and the left rotation stopped.  The helicopter entered a 
descent toward the terrain with approximately 10 knots of forward airspeed. Approximately 
30-40 feel above ground level (agl), the pilot pulled the "remaining" collective to slow the 
descent and rotor RPM. The helicopter's main rotor blades contacted trees, and subsequently 
the helicopter came to rest on its right side. The pilot then shut off the fuel cut off, secured the 
electrical equipment, and exited the helicopter.  During the accident sequence, the pilot did not 
jettison the external load.  The pilot reported the wind conditions as "calm" and the 
temperature 71 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of the accident.    
 
Examination by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector at the accident site 
revealed the tail rotor driveshaft was intact, no particles were found on the tail rotor and 
transmission magnetic chip detectors, and no damage was noted to the tail rotor blades.
The airframe was examined under the supervision of a FAA inspector at the operator's 
headquarters in Minden, Nevada.  Examination of the airframe revealed no anomalies with the 
main transmission, tail rotor drive, airframe fuel, and flight control systems.  A fuel sample was 
obtained and tested with no evidence of contamination noted.  In addition, the operator tested 
the fuel from the supplier at the time of the accident with no contamination or anomalies 
noted.
A review of the engine records revealed at the time of the accident, the airframe had 
accumulated 19,658.4 hours and the engine had accumulated 3,216.5 total hours and 318.6 
hours since overhaul.  On August 31, 2005, the helicopter underwent a 100-hour inspection, at 
a total airframe time of 19,637.4 hours.         
On November 29, 2005, at the facilities of Heli-Support, Inc., Fort Collins, Colorado, under the 
supervision of the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the Turbomeca Artouste III B1 engine (serial 
number 1818) was examined and functionally tested.  A borescope examination of the engine 
revealed deposits in and on all fuel injector wheel holes.  The deposit material and source of the 
material was not determined.  The injector wheel contamination was not removed prior to the 
functionally test of the engine.  Upon completion of the visual and borescope examination, the 
Page 4 of 6DEN05LA131
engine was functionally tested in accordance approved manufacturer's test procedures in a 
dynamometer equipped test cell.  The functional test of the engine met or exceeded 
manufacturer's specifications, and no anomalies were noted with the engine.
The fuel pump and speed governor were removed from the engine and functionally tested.  
Flows were within serviceable limits for repair functional test.  No anomalies were noted with 
the fuel pump and speed governor.
After the functional test of the engine, the engine was reborescoped.  The borescope 
examination revealed deposits to a lesser degree, in and on the injector wheel holes.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2004
Flight Time:
14500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1200 hours (Total, this make and model), 14300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 230 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 80 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aerospatiale
Registration:
N220SH
Model/Series:
SA315B 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2466
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2005, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
21 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
19658 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
Artouste III
Registered Owner:
Skydance Northwestern Inc.
Rated Power:
800 hp
Operator:
Skydance Northwestern Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Page 5 of 6DEN05LA131
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
140°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Duschene, UT 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Duschene, UT 
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
1200 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Duchesne Muninipal Airport (U69)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
210 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
40.192500, -110.380833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Aaron M Sauer
Adopted Date:
07/31/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
James Gilchiest; Federal Aviation Administration; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DEN05LA131
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
