Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Modesto, CA
Accident Number:
WPR12LA057
Date & Time:
12/01/2011, 1339 PST 
Registration:
N547UA
Aircraft:
BOEING 757-222
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Turbulence encounter
Injuries:
1 Serious, 151 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
While en route at flight level (FL) 360, the captain of the commercial air carrier flight 
requested and was granted a lower altitude (FL 300) to minimize the effect that turbulence was 
having on the airplane. After the captain received pilot reports indicating that varying degrees 
of turbulence, mountain wave activity, and low-level windshear existed, he illuminated the seat 
belt sign and made an announcement for the passengers to be seated. The flight crew then 
advised the cabin crewmembers of possible turbulence and instructed them to prepare the 
cabin for landing, stay near their seats, and be seated immediately if turbulence was 
encountered. About 7 to 10 minutes later, while the airplane was at FL 300, the flight 
encountered moderate-to-severe turbulence. A flight attendant who was in the lavatory when 
the turbulence was encountered sustained a broken ankle after being thrown in the air twice.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight's encounter with known severe turbulence associated with mountain wave activity, 
which resulted in a flight attendant sustaining a broken ankle.
Findings
Environmental issues
Terrain induced turbulence - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 2 of 6WPR12LA057
Factual Information
On December 1, 2011, about 1339 Pacific standard time, a Boeing 757-222, N547UA, 
encountered turbulence at flight level (FL) 300, during the cruise phase of flight. United 
Airlines (UAL) operated flight 721 under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
121 as a scheduled domestic passenger flight. One flight attendant sustained serious injuries; 
the 2 flight crew, 3 additional flight attendants, and 146 passengers were not injured. The 
airplane was not damaged. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument 
flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed. The flight departed the Denver International 
Airport (DEN), Denver, Colorado, at 1215, and was en-route to San Francisco International 
Airport (SFO), San Francisco, California, when the turbulence was encountered.
According to United Airlines, the Western United States was experiencing widespread 
moderate to severe turbulence on the day of the incident.  The flight planned en route cruise 
altitude was FL360.  While en route, the flight descended to FL300 at 13:17 PT because 
smoother conditions were reported.  As the flight was nearing the Sierra Nevada Mountains on 
the Modesto 3 arrival into San Francisco, there were reports of turbulence up ahead.  When the 
reports were received, the captain illuminated the seat belt sign and made an announcement 
for passengers to be seated with seat belts fastened.
The purser was contacted by the captain to discuss the approaching area of turbulence.  The 
captain directed the purser to have the flight attendants wrap up cabin service, and stay near 
their seats and to be seated immediately if turbulence was encountered. The purser advised the 
cabin crew of the captain's directions. After the announcement was made, an aft galley flight 
attendant stated she went into the lavatory to brush her teeth.  After approximately 7-10 
minutes later, following the announcement, 2-3 jolts of moderate turbulence followed by a 
brief episode of severe turbulence was encountered.  This occurred 22 minutes before landing. 
The flight, at the time, was on the Modesto Three Standard Terminal Arrival for SFO, in the 
vicinity of ELCAP intersection. The flight attendant, in the lavatory, reportedly was thrown 
twice in the air, and landed awkwardly on her right ankle.   The flight continued to San 
Francisco and landed at 1401 local time.
The turbulence event was reported by United Airlines on December 5, 2011, after it was 
confirmed that one of the flight attendants had suffered a broken fibula.
A weather study was completed by a National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) staff 
meteorologist; the complete study is attached to the public docket for this report. The area was 
favorable for mountain wave activity over the region due to an upper level low, and strong wind 
flow over the mountain ranges. The GOES-11 visible and infrared satellite images depicted 
clear skies over the accident area with no visual signs of potential turbulence.
Several pilot reports in the surrounding area and at varying altitudes around the time of the 
accident reported low-level wind shear, extreme turbulence, occasional to moderate chop, 
continuous light chop, and moderate to severe turbulence, along with mountain wave activity.
The flight data recorder (FDR) information was read out and analyzed by a flight data recorder 
specialist at the NTSB. The complete report is attached to the public docket for this accident. 
The FDR contained approximately 108 hours of recorded data, which included the turbulence 
event. The FDR data indicated that approximately 1 hour 34 minutes after takeoff, the vertical 
acceleration fluctuated between 0 g's and 2 g's peaking at a maximum of 1.91 g's during a 28-
Page 3 of 6WPR12LA057
second time period.
According to an excerpt from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Air Traffic Control 
(ATC) package, at 1242, UAL flight 721 checked into sector 34, and was told to expect 
occasional light chop. The flight crew was also told that AIRMETs for the western United States 
were available on HIWAS, flight watch, or flight service frequencies. The flight crew was then 
issued a frequency change. Upon check in with the new sector (sector 47), the flight crew was 
advised that their ride would deteriorate in about 20 minutes. The UAL flight crew was 
instructed to advise when that happened. The sector controller told them to plan on a lower 
altitude. About 15 minutes later, the UAL flight crew requested a lower altitude. UAL flight 721 
was issued another frequency change. After checking in with the new sector controller the 
flight crew was advised of "bad rides over the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range, but that FL300 
and FL320 were not bad." When queried how their ride was, the flight crew responded that 
they had experienced light chop. About 10 minutes later, the flight crew reported that they had 
encountered moderate to severe at FL 300 and asked for a lower altitude. UAL flight 721 was 
cleared to FL270, and the sector controller asked them to verify that they had encountered 
severe turbulence, to which the pilot replied that he wouldn't quite call it severe turbulence, but 
it was a bad ride. The detailed report is attached to the public docket for this report.
The flight continued to its destination and landed without further incident.
History of Flight
Approach-IFR initial 
approach
Turbulence encounter (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
54
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/23/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2011
Flight Time:
11290 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3823 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 6WPR12LA057
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
51
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Unknown
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/21/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
9469 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6782 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BOEING
Registration:
N547UA
Model/Series:
757-222 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
25368
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
178
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/2011, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
74780 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P & W
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
PW2040
Registered Owner:
WELLS FARGO BANK 
NORTHWEST NA TRUSTEE
Rated Power:
40900 lbs
Operator:
United Airlines
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
United Airlines
Operator Designator Code:
UAL
Page 5 of 6WPR12LA057
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MOD, 99 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
62 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
262째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
24 knots / 29 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Clear Air
Wind Direction:
340째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Severe
Altimeter Setting:
30.02 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19째C / -7째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
DENVER, CO (DEN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
SAN FRANCISCO, CA (SFO)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1215 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class A
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious, 5 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
146 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 151 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.785278, -119.706944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye Cornejo
Adopted Date:
08/11/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Kathryn Reneau; FAA Denver CMO; Denver, CO
Jeff Plantz; United Airlines; Chicago, IL
Gerry Hartmann; Airline Pilots Association; Sacramento, CA
Publish Date:
08/11/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82481
Page 6 of 6WPR12LA057
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
