The helicopter pilot observed a caution light for the number one hydraulic system and a 
corresponding complete loss of hydraulic system pressure for that system. The pilot declared 
an emergency and performed a run-on landing. A postincident examination of the system's 
hydraulic pump revealed that two of its cover attachment bolts had separated. The bolt heads 
fractured in tension from their shanks via intergranular cracks which initiated at the filet 
radius between the bead and the shank. The bolt fractures exhibited intergranular fracture 
features over 90 percent of the surface. The operator™s incident report safety recommendation 
stated that the pump's cover bolts should be replaced at overhaul; however, it is not required. 
The helicopter had accumulated 269 hours since overhaul.
The loss of the number one hydraulic system fluid and hydraulic pressure during cruise due to 
the failure of the bolts that secure the hydraulic pump's cover.
On July 1, 2009, at 1815 central daylight time, a Bell 230 helicopter, N880SF, sustained no 
damage during a forced landing at the General Downing - Peoria International Airport (PIA), 
near Peoria, Illinois, after it lost fluid in its number one hydraulic system during cruise flight. 
The commercial helicopter pilot, two emergency medical services (EMS) crewmembers, and 
the patient were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed. The local non-scheduled domestic 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 EMS 
transport flight departed PIA at time unknown.
According to the operator™s incident report, the pilot observed a caution light for the number 
one hydraulic system and a corresponding complete loss of hydraulic system pressure for that 
system. The pilot declared an emergency and performed a run-on landing. Examination of the 
system's hydraulic pump revealed that two of its cover attachment bolts had separated. The 
separated bolt heads were retained by safety wire. This hydraulic pump manufacturer™s part 
number was 65132-1. The Bell Helicopter part number is 222-380-009-105, which is also 
usable on the Bell 222 series and 430 model helicopters. The bolts that sustained the 
separation were part number MS24678-17.
According to the helicopter manufacturer, these hydraulic pumps do not have a scheduled 
overhaul cycle and the pumps are replaced on-condition. The manufacturer does not track the 
service times of these pumps. Reportedly, this was the first failure of the hydraulic pump cover 
attachment bolts. 
The pump manufacturer had the failed bolts examined. The bolt heads fractured in tension 
from their shanks via intergranular cracks initiating at the filet radius between the bead and 
the shank. The bolt fractures exhibited intergranular fracture features over 90 percent of the 
surface.
According to the operator, the incident pump accumulated 269 hours of time prior to the bolt 
failures. The operator™s incident report safety recommendation indicated, ﬁRecommend pump 
cover bolts be replaced at overhaul.ﬂ
