The pilot reported that he lowered the landing gear handle on downwind to land and heard the 
gear cycle down.  He told investigators that he could not recall if he saw green, gear down 
indicator lights.  While in the landing flare he heard someone call "gear, gear" on the radio, but 
it was too late for him to go around.  The left main gear collapsed on touchdown and the 
airplane exited the side of the runway, substantially damaging the horizontal stabilizer and 
elevator.  No anomalies were found with the landing gear indicator lights during the post 
accident inspections.  Following four additional gear malfunctions, the landing gear 
accumulator was found to leak, allowing air into the hydraulic system. The seals from the 
accumulator were not retained and the reason for the failure of the seals was not determined.
The failure of the landing gear accumulator seal for undetermined reasons.  Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot™s failure to confirm the status of the landing gear.
On July 1, 2009, at 0830 mountain daylight time, a Cessna T210L airplane, N2118S, was 
substantially damaged during landing at Dona Ana County Airport (5T6), Santa Teresa, New 
Mexico.  The private pilot was not injured.  The flight was being conducted under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight plan.  The flight 
originated at Cielo Dorado Estates Airport (TA50), El Paso, Texas, and was terminating at the 
time of the accident.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported he lowered the landing gear handle on downwind to land and heard the gear 
cycle down.  He told the investigator he could not recall if he saw green, gear down indicator 
lights.  While in the landing flare he heard someone call "gear, gear" on the radio, but it was too 
late for him to go around.  The left main gear collapsed on touchdown and the airplane exited 
the side of the runway.  The pilot did not recall hearing the gear warning horn prior to landing.
Examination of the airplane revealed substantial damage to the horizontal stabilizer and the 
elevator.  The right main and nose landing gear were found in a down and locked position and 
the left main was in the gear well.  During initial inspection by FAA investigators the left 
landing gear did not extend fully and lock into position during manual extension, but the gear 
operated correctly and did lock down when hydraulic power was applied to the system.  The 
hydraulic system was found to be properly serviced and the three gear indicator lights operated 
properly when the gear was extended and locked.  The airplane was taken to a repair station 
and the landing gear was examined further.  No abnormalities were found with the airplane at 
that time.  The witness who made the radio call of ﬁgear, gearﬂ could not be located.
In the months after the accident, and following the repairs to the airplane, the pilot had four 
additional landing gear malfunctions and failures to extend.  He said he had to manually 
extend the gear during each instance.  After the fourth occurrence, the nose gear up-lock 
actuator and the landing gear accumulator were removed and resealed.  The seal in the landing 
gear accumulator was found to leak.  The accumulator requires gaseous nitrogen or dry air.  
The seals from the accumulator were not retained by maintenance personnel and were not 
available for examination by investigators.  The reason for the failure of the seals was not 
determined.
