The student pilot reported that despite his request for the airplane to be refueled with 30 
gallons of fuel prior to takeoff, the fixed base operator had filled the airplane with 67.7 gallons 
of fuel. The flight instructor reported that after the student pilot was notified that the airplane 
had been topped off with fuel, he "ran the numbers in [his] head and determined it would be 
fine because of the same conditions that were present" for takeoff from a different airport 
earlier in the day. The student pilot reported that while on the initial climb from the airport, 
the airplane stopped climbing and began to descend. At an altitude of 100 feet above ground 
level, the flight instructor took control of the airplane to ensure a proper climbout speed was 
maintained. The airplane continued to descend and collided with power lines. Subsequently, 
the airplane nosed over and impacted the ground in a vacant lot. A witness reported that the 
airplane slowly accelerated down the 4,067-foot-long runway and used approximately 85 to 90 
percent of the available runway to become airborne. The witness observed the airplane 
"climbing at an extremely slow rate," and stated it appeared that "the pilot attempted to 
increase the rate of climb twice," which resulted in the airplane™s "left wing starting to dip as it 
appeared to be approaching a stall." Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation 
Administration inspector revealed that the empennage had separated from the fuselage just aft 
of the cabin and that the rudder, vertical stabilizer, nose, and wings were structurally damaged. 
No mechanical anomalies were noted with the engine or airframe. Takeoff performance 
calculations for the reported weather conditions revealed that the airplane™s required takeoff 
distance to clear a 50-foot obstacle was 3,921 feet on a paved surface.
The flight instructor's failure to maintain clearance from power lines during takeoff.
On July 1, 2009, at 0930 mountain daylight time, a Republic RC-3 airplane, N87487, was 
substantially damaged when it struck power lines during takeoff initial climb from the Burley 
Municipal Airport (BYI), Burley, Idaho. The airplane was registered to and operated by the 
student pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The 
certificated flight instructor sustained serious injuries and the student pilot sustained minor 
injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the cross-
country flight. The instructional flight was originating at the time of the accident with an 
intended destination of Caldwell, Idaho.
In a written statement, the student pilot reported that upon arrival to a fixed base operator 
(FBO) located at BYI, the flight instructor requested that the airplane be serviced with 30 
gallons of fuel. The flight instructor and student pilot then borrowed a "courtesy vehicle" and 
went to a nearby café for breakfast. The student pilot stated that upon returning to the airport, 
he "found that the attendant had serviced N87487 with 67.70gl [gallons] (full capacity) of fuel." 
The student pilot added that the flight instructor said "we should be ok" after he asked if there 
"was any way of siphoning out the excess fuel." The student pilot and flight instructor 
conducted a "quick preflight" prior to departure. 
The student pilot further reported that prior to takeoff, "the engine sounded normal and the 
run-up went fine." After verifying the wind direction, the student pilot taxied to runway 24 and 
proceeded to take off. During the takeoff roll, the airplane became airborne about three-
quarters of the way down the runway. As the airplane climbed to about 100 feet above ground 
level (agl), "it seemed like it wasn't climbing well." The flight instructor verified the throttle, 
mixture, and propeller control lever positions and noted "no change in the airplane™s climb 
performance." The student pilot stated that the airplane overflew a set of trees and "started to 
settle as if the airplane was within dead air." Subsequently, the airplane struck a set of power 
lines about 60-feet in height, 0.7 miles west of the departure end of the runway and impacted 
the ground. 
In a written statement, the flight instructor reported that prior to arriving at BYI they refueled 
at the Preston Municipal Airport (U10), Preston, Idaho. Prior to departing Preston, the flight 
instructor performed "a performance calculation to determine that the aircraft would perform 
at that runway and elevation." During the flight, he noticed the "fuel gauge was low" and 
decided to land in Burley "to put on some fuel." The flight instructor further reported that after 
the student pilot was notified that the airplane had been topped off with fuel, he "ran the 
numbers in [his] head and determined it would be fine because of the same conditions that 
were present at Preston, Idaho." 
After completing a normal run up, the student taxied the airplane into position at the end of 
runway 24, ensuring to use all of the runway available. The flight instructor instructed the 
student to hold the brakes and verify that the engine was producing at least 2,300 rpm. As the 
airplane began the take off roll the flight instructor noted that all engine gauges were indicating 
normally. The student rotated the airplane at 70 miles per hour (mph) and continued to climb 
out at 80 mph. The flight instructor stated that upon reaching 100 to 150 feet agl, "the airplane 
quit climbing" as they maintained airspeed of 80 mph. Shortly after, the flight instructor 
observed the airspeed beginning to decrease and the airplane began to descend. The flight 
instructor took control of the airplane and told the student that there were power lines in their 
flight path and to brace for impact. Subsequently, the airplane impacted the power lines and 
"pitched downwards directly into the vacant lot."
A witness, an airline transport rated pilot, who was located on the ramp of BYI, reported that 
the airplane appeared to be accelerating down runway 24 at a very slow rate. The witness 
estimated that the airplane used between 85 to 90 percent of the available runway before it 
rotated. The witness stated that the airplane was "climbing at an extremely slow rate." As the 
airplane was about one-quarter to one-half mile from the departure end of the runway, the 
witness estimated it was about 60 to 80 feet agl. The witness further reported that it appeared 
"the pilot attempted to increase the rate of climb twice," which resulted in the airplane™s "left 
wing starting to dip as it appeared to be approaching a stall." 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that the empennage was separated from the fuselage aft of the cabin area. The vertical 
stabilizer and rudder were structurally damaged. Flight control continuity was established 
from the cockpit controls to all primary flight control surfaces. The engine remained attached 
to the airframe. Engine control continuity was also established and the positions of the controls 
matched the throttle and mixture controls in the cockpit. The inspector reported that the fuel 
samples taken from the aircraft and the refueling facility were free of contamination. 
Examination of the engine and airframe revealed no mechanical anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. 
The Burley Municipal Airport's reported field elevation is 4,150 feet mean sea level (msl). 
Runway 24 is a 4,067-foot long and 75-foot wide asphalt runway, which features a 0.2 percent 
upward gradient. 
The Automatic Surface Observation System (ASOS) at BYI reported at 0853, wind from 260 
degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, few clouds at 11,100 feet agl, temperature 19 
degrees Celsius, dew point 8 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.04 inches of 
Mercury. 
Using a Safety Board computer program, the Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) 
calculated the density altitude to be 5,581 feet and the pressure altitude to be 4,040 feet. Using 
the "Distance Required to Takeoff and Clear 50' Obstacle" performance chart for a Republic 
RC-3 equipped with a Franklin engine, reported weather conditions, reported weight of the 
airplane, and the calculated pressure altitude, the IIC calculated the distance required for take 
off and climb to clear a 50 ft obstacle was 3,921 feet on a paved runway surface with the 
landing gear down and flaps up. The published maximum gross weight of the airplane is 3,150 
pounds. The student pilot and flight instructor reported that the weight of the airplane at the 
time of the accident was 3,150 pounds. 
The Preston Airport (U10), Preston, Idaho, is at a recorded field elevation of 4,728 feet msl. 
U10 is equipped with two runways, 3/21, a 3,457-foot long asphalt runway, and 16/34, a 2,437 
gravel runway. Both runways feature a 0.3 percent gradient. The closest weather reporting 
station to U10 was located 20 miles south at the Logan-Cache Airport, Logan, Utah. Recorded 
weather reports indicate that the morning of July 1, between 0451 to 0751, temperatures varied 
from 16 degrees Celsius and 18 degrees Celsius.
