The pilot stated to the inspector that upon landing at 110 knots airspeed he was unable to stop 
when full brakes were applied before departing the end of the wet runway. A witness stated 
that he saw the airplane land about halfway down the runway very fast.  The witness, at the 
accident site, stated that he saw the airplane 'well high on the final approach glidepath', and 
that the airplane landed 'very  fast' and touched down ' about mid field'. The FAA inspector 
stated, that after the airplane departed the end of the wet runway,  it rolled down an 
embankment collapsing the nose gear and damaging the inboard structure of the left wing ribs, 
and the nose gear bulkhead on the right side. The flight manual for the Beech 95-A55 states the 
normal approach speed for this airplane is 87knots. 
The pilot's excessive airspeed, and improper touch down point during landing, that resulted in 
the runway end overun. Factors were the wet runway surface, and the embankment at the end 
of the runway. 
 On September 1, 1997, about 1540 central daylight time, a Beech 95-A55, N437CG, 
sustained substantial damage when it ran off the departure end of runway 36 during landing at 
Murfreesboro Municipal Airport, Murfreesboro, Tennessee.  The airplane was operated by the 
pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan was filed for this business 
flight.  The private pilot and two passengers were not injured.  The flight originated from 
Destin, Florida at 1245, on the same day.  The pilot stated to the inspector that 
upon landing at 110 knots airspeed, he was unable to stop, when full brakes were applied, 
before departing the end of the wet runway.  A witness, at the accident site, stated that he saw 
the airplane "well high on the final approach glidepath", and that the airplane landed "very  
fast" and touched down " about mid field". The FAA inspector stated, that after the airplane 
departed the end of the wet runway, it rolled down an embankment collapsing the nose gear, 
damaging the inboard structure of the left wing ribs, and the nose gear bulk head on the right 
side.  The inspector found skid marks on the runway, and no mechanical or system 
malfunctions were identified during the wreckage examination.   Runway 36 was 
3800 feet in length and made of asphalt. The runway conditions for that day were 84 degrees 
Fahrenheit and light rain. According to the pilots operating handbook for the Beech 95-A55, 
the estimated landing roll for this airplane, at 84 degree Fahrenheit temperature, normal 
approach speed of 87 knots, and under dry conditions would be 1,650 ft.
