The pilot reported that he was in the process of executing a turn to reverse direction upon 
completion of an aerial application pass, when the airplane stalled. Subsequent to the loss of 
control, the airplane impacted the ground in a left wing low and nose down attitude and came 
to rest in an open pasture. The pilot acknowledged that there was no mechanical malfunction 
prior to the loss of control. The pilot stated that in the 90 days preceding the accident he had 
accumulated 500 hours of flight time and the fact that he was trying to do too much probably 
caught up with him. 
The pilot's inadvertent stall during a turn to reverse direction during an aerial application 
flight. A factor was the pilot's chronic fatigue as result of cumulative long workdays. 
 On September 1, 1997, at 0830 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G-164B 
agricultural airplane, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while maneuvering 
near Marksville, Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not 
injured.  The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight for which a flight plan was not 
filed.  The airplane departed from an airstrip near Vick, Louisiana, approximately 30 minutes 
prior to the accident. 
According to the FAA inspector who traveled to the accident site, the pilot was in the process of 
executing a turn to reverse direction upon completion of an aerial application pass, when the 
airplane stalled.  Subsequent to the loss of control, the airplane impacted the ground in a left 
wing low and nose down attitude and came to rest in an open pasture.  
Examination of the wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that both top wings and the main 
landing gear assembly incurred sustained structural damage.  In the enclosed pilot/operator 
report, the pilot acknowledged that there was no mechanical malfunction prior to the loss of 
control.  In the same document the pilot reported that in the 90 days preceding the accident, he 
had accumulated 500 hours of flight time.
In a telephonic interview conducted by the investigator in charge, the pilot stated that the 
accident occurred during the first flight of the day.  He added that in the morning of the 
accident "he felt refreshed and alert following a good night's sleep."  He further stated that "his 
work days for the previous 4 to 5 months had been long, normally working long days from 
sunrise to sunset" spraying the rice and cotton crops, as well as the boll weevil infestation.  The 
pilot further stated that "the fact that he was trying to do too much probably caught up with 
him" since he had gone from one contract to the other without rest.
