The pilot reported the '...engine suffered [a] dramatic loss of power...' about 10 minutes after 
takeoff.  He said he could not restart the engine and made a forced landing in the '...best 
available field... .'  The airplane collided with a power line during its final approach and nosed 
onto the ground.  The on-site examination revealed no mechanical anomalies with the airframe 
or engine that would prevent flight.  Fuel was found in the engine s fuel lines and fuel injection 
pump.  About a teaspoon of water was found in the gascolator.  Water was not found in the fuel 
lines or injector manifold.  Attempts to have the fuel injection pump examined at the 
manufacturer in the Czech Republic, with the Federal Aviation Administration's assistance was 
made. The FAA was unable to participate because the engine is not certificated under the FAA's 
regulations.  The Czech Civil Aviation Authority and engine manufacturer examined the fuel 
injection pump.  The examination revealed the pump operated within the manufacturer's 
specifications. 
Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
 On September 1, 1997, at 1035 central daylight time (cdt), a Bucker Jungmann, N131G, piloted 
by a commercially certificated pilot, was substantially damaged during a collision with power 
lines and the ground during a forced landing approach.  The pilot reported a total loss of power 
while cruising at 2,000 feet mean sea level. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The 
pilot reported minor injuries.  The flight departed Blakesburg, Iowa, at 1025 cdt.
According to the pilot, the "...engine suffered [a] dramatic loss of power..." about 10 minutes 
after takeoff.  He said the engine could not be restarted following the failure.  The pilot said he 
selected the "...best available field..." for the forced landing.  He said the airplane struck a 
power line during the landing approach and nosed down onto the ground.
The North American representative for the engine manufacturer, Letecke Oprauny Maleske 
(LOM), stated the manager at N131G's departure airport said N131G had aborted a takeoff due 
to "...engine difficulties... ."  The representative's statement continues, "...[the] fuel pumps 
[were] drained, and the engine ran at high RPM, and all seemed to be working fine."  A 
mechanic from the departure airport examined N131G at the accident site.  He stated the 
"...fuel was not contaminated in any way."  He said the gascolator had "...less than a 
teaspoon..." of water in it.  His statement is appended to this report.  
The on-scene investigation revealed mechanical continuity within the LOM M332AK engine.  
One magneto was removed and sparked when rotated.  The fuselage fuel tank had sustained 
collision damage and was ruptured.  About 1-cup of residual fuel having an odor and color 
similar to 100LL was found in the tank.   Fuel was found in all 4 injector lines.  The fuel lines 
were removed from the fuel injection pump.  Fuel drained from the fuel pump at all 4 fuel line 
attach points.  The gascolator contained fuel and about 1-teaspoon of water when examined.  
The throttle, mixture, and supercharger controls sustained crash damage and were not able to 
be moved.  The throttle was found in the full forward position.
The fuel injection pump could not be properly inspected by facilities in the United States.  The 
Federal Aviation Administration's AAI-100 in Washington, D.C. was asked to have one of the 
Agency's Belgium inspectors observe the manufacturer's testing of the pump.   The FAA was 
unable to assit because the engine was not an FAA certified engine.  The fuel injection pump 
was examined at the manufacturer's facility in Malesice, Czech Republic, with the cooperation 
of the Czech Republic Aviation Authority.  
The examination revealed that "The injection pump was securing reliable engine regulation...," 
according to the Quality Director for the engine manufacturer.  A copy of this report is 
appended to this report.          
