Air traffic controllers received an emergency radio call from a person representing the airplane.  
The pilot responded that oil was on the airplane's windshield and that oil pressure was zero.  
The airplane was given a heading to divert to the closest airport.  The pilot was asked if he 
could maintain altitude and he responded "no."  The pilot advised that he was going to land in 
a field.  Air traffic controllers alerted crash, fire, and rescue personnel of the airplane's location.  
The airplane was found near the top of a crest in rolling pastureland about eight miles 
northeast of the diversion airport.  The empennage was streaked with a liquid consistent with 
oil.  The windshield was broken and pieces of it were coated with a liquid consistent with oil.  
An on-scene examination of the wreckage revealed no airframe pre-impact anomalies.  The top 
right side of the engine, aft facing forward, was coated with a liquid consistent with oil.  The 
engine case and cylinders showed no pre-impact anomalies that would have precluded engine 
operation.  The top of the separated reduction gear case was coated with a liquid consistent 
with oil.  Disassembly showed that the upper right section of the nose seal assembly, which 
sealed against the reduction gear case, exhibited an area coated with a liquid consistent with 
oil.  The remainder of the seal was intact and was not coated with liquid.  The airplane did not 
have shoulder harnesses installed and was not required to have them installed.  Advisory 
Circular 91-65, Use of Shoulder Harness in Passenger Seats, in part, stated, "The [National 
Transportation Safety Board] concluded that shoulder harness use is the most effective way of 
reducing fatalities and serious injuries in general aviation accidents."
A loss of engine power while in cruise flight due to an oil leak from the nose seal of the 
reduction gear case.  Contributing to the accident were the oil leak, the pilot's reduced visibility 
out the windscreen, and rising terrain.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 2, 2006, about 1354 eastern standard time, a Cessna 175, N9408B, piloted by a 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with terrain during a forced landing 
following a reported loss of oil pressure during cruise near Battle Creek, Michigan.  The 
personal flight was operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on file.  The 
pilot sustained fatal injuries.  The flight originated from the Huron County Memorial Airport 
(BAX), near Bad Axe, Michigan, about 1130, and was destined for an airport in the Chicago, 
Illinois, area.
About 1351, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic controllers near Kalamazoo, 
Michigan received an emergency radio call on the emergency frequency from a person 
representing call sign N9408B.  The controllers contacted N9408B and the pilot responded 
back that oil was on the airplane's windshield and that oil pressure was zero.  The airplane was 
given a heading for the W. K. Kellogg Airport (BTL), near Battle Creek, Michigan.  The pilot 
was asked if he could maintain altitude and he responded "no."  The pilot advised that he was 
going to land in a field.  Air traffic controllers alerted crash, fire, and rescue personnel of the 
airplane's location.  About 1354, another airplane overhead reported that they picked up a 
signal from an emergency locator transmitter (ELT).
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with a lighter-than-air free balloon rating and he 
held private pilot airplane single-engine land privileges with an instrument airplane rating.  He 
held a third-class medical certificate, which was issued on April 6, 2006.  The medical 
certificate listed no limitations.
The pilot's logbooks found at the accident site showed that he had accumulated about 1,500 
hours total flight time and about 702 hours of single-engine flight time.  An endorsement in 
that logbook showed the pilot completed a flight review on July 22, 2005.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N9408B, a 1957 Cessna 175, Skylark, serial number 55208, was an externally braced high-wing, 
propeller-driven, fixed landing gear, semi-monocoque design, four-seat airplane.  A 175-
horsepower, geared, six-cylinder, air cooled, horizontally opposed, carbureted, Continental 
GO-300-D, serial number 23002-2-D-R, engine, powered the airplane.  The propeller was a 
two-bladed, all-metal, fixed pitch, McCauley model 1B175/MFC8467, with serial number 
P71274.  The airplane had a certified maximum takeoff weight of 2,350 lbs.
The airplane's logbooks showed that an annual inspection was completed on June 13, 2006.  
The airplane had accumulated 4,297.5 of total time at the date of the inspection.  
Records indicated the airplane was refueled with 27.8 gallons of 100 low lead aviation fuel at 
BAX on October 30, 2006.  The person who fueled the airplane reported that this amount of 
fuel filled up the fuel tanks.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1353, the recorded weather at BTL was: Wind 260 degrees at 16 knots; visibility 10 statute 
miles; sky condition scattered 1,600 feet, scattered 3,000 feet, broken 4,700 feet; temperature 
-1 degree C; dew point -4 degrees C; altimeter 30.16 inches of mercury.
At 1358, the recorded weather at BTL was: Wind 280 degrees at 16 knots; visibility 2 1/2 
statute miles with light snow; sky condition scattered 1,600 feet, broken 2,800 feet, broken 
4,200 feet; temperature -1 degree C; dew point - 4 degrees C; altimeter 30.16 inches of 
mercury; remarks snow began 1357.
At 1400, the recorded weather at BTL was: Wind 280 at 13 knots; visibility 3/4 statute mile 
with light snow; sky condition few clouds 100 feet, broken 2,700 feet, overcast 8,000; 
temperature -1 degree C; dew point -3 degrees C; altimeter 30.17 inches of mercury; remarks 
snow began at 1357.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was found near the top of a crest in rolling pastureland about eight miles 
northeast of BTL.  The airplane wreckage was found without the aid of the ELT and Civil Air 
Patrol members turned off the activated ELT.  The airplane fuselage was inverted and the 
empennage had separated from it at the joint aft of the rear side windows.  The separated 
empennage was resting upright on the fuselage.  A ground scar was found.  The scar started 
about 38 feet south of the wreckage and ended at the front of the engine cowling.  The nose 
landing gear was found about nine feet from the engine cowling.  The propeller and reduction 
gear case separated from the engine case.  The propeller and reduction gear case was found 
about two feet from the engine cowling.  The empennage was streaked with a liquid consistent 
with oil.  The windshield was broken and pieces of it were coated with a liquid consistent with 
oil.
An on-scene examination of the wreckage was conducted.  Flight control cables were 
continuous from each flight control to each flight control surface.  Flight control continuity was 
established.  Engine controls were continuous from each control to their respective engine 
component and engine control continuity was established.  The carburetor was separated from 
the engine case.  A liquid consistent with aviation gasoline (avgas) was found in the carburetor 
bowl.  The carburetor fuel finger screen was clean.  The liquid from the carburetor was tested 
for the presence of water and water was not detected in that liquid.  An elbow fitting to the 
gascolator was separated and the gascolator did not contain any liquid.  The top structure of 
the gascolator on the side with the fuel line intact to it did contain a liquid consistent with 
avgas.  About 15 gallons of liquid consistent with avgas were recovered from the wing tanks.  
The engine driven vacuum pump was removed and it produced suction when rotated by hand.  
The engine rotated when battery power was applied to the starter.  A thumb compression was 
observed at all cylinders except the number four cylinder.  The number four cylinder rocker 
cover was removed and the exhaust valve was seized in the open position.  Both magnetos 
produced spark.  The top right side of the engine, aft facing forward, was coated with a liquid 
consistent with oil.  The oil cooler, mounted on the right front portion of the engine case, was 
compromised.  A liquid consistent with oil was exiting from the breach on the front and aft side 
of the cooler.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Calhoun County Coroner's Office coordinated the pilot's autopsy.  The autopsy was 
conducted on November 3, 2006.
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute prepared a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident 
Report. The report was negative for the tests performed.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
An unrestrained airplane battery was found in the wreckage.  The unrestrained battery was in 
addition to the airplane battery secured in the aft fuselage.  The unrestrained battery was found 
resting next to the pilot.  
The 1957 Cessna 175 did not have shoulder harnesses installed and was not required to have 
them installed at the time it was certified.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The engine was shipped to its manufacturer, Teledyne Continental Motors, Inc. (TCM), in 
Mobile, Alabama, for a disassembly examination on March 12, 2006.  Examination of the oil 
cooler revealed that the breaches were in the areas where cross supports had separated.  The 
cooler was filled with liquid to look for other leaks.  No other leaks were observed than from 
the breaches under the supports.  The supports were sectioned and microscopic examination 
revealed the support separations were consistent with overload.
The number four exhaust valve did not exhibit any heat distress and it was not seized when the 
case and cylinders were examined.  The engine case disassembly revealed no heat distress to 
the bearings.  The engine case and cylinders showed no pre-impact anomalies that would have 
precluded engine operation. 
The top of the separated reduction gear case was coated with a liquid consistent with oil.  The 
case was disassembled.  The upper right section of the nose seal assembly, which sealed against 
the case, exhibited an area coated with a liquid consistent with oil.  The remainder of the seal 
was intact and was not coated with liquid.  
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
Advisory Circular 91-65, Use of Shoulder Harness in Passenger Seats, in part, stated: 
The [National Transportation Safety Board] found that 20 percent of 
the fatally injured occupants in these accidents could have survived 
with shoulder harnesses (assuming the seat belt fastened) and 88 
percent of the seriously injured could have had significantly less 
severe injuries with the use of shoulder harnesses.  Energy absorbing 
seats could have benefited 34 percent of the seriously injuries.  The 
safety board concluded that shoulder harness use is the most effective 
way of reducing fatalities and serious injuries in general aviation 
accidents.
The parties to the investigation included the FAA, Cessna Aircraft Company, and TCM
The aircraft wreckage was released to a representative of the insurance company.
