The pilot reported that after reaching a cruising altitude of 9,000 feet the engine "missed" and 
the oil pressure, oil temperature, and manifold pressure began to drop.  The pilot attempted to 
fly to the nearest airport maintaining a 500 to 800 foot per minute descent.  Unable to make it 
to the airport, he chose a field in which to land.  He stated he cleared the trees, which 
surrounded the field, and applied flaps to slow the airplane.  The field was muddy so the pilot 
used the emergency gear extension to lower the landing gear so the airplane would not slide 
into the trees.  The airplane touched down and slid approximately 25 feet prior to coming to 
rest.  The airplane sustained substantial damage to the left wing and fuselage.  An engine 
teardown revealed holes in the crankcase near the number four cylinder and that the engine 
had sustained both thermal and mechanical damage as a result of oil starvation.  A hole was 
noted in the turbine wheel shroud on the hot section of the right turbocharger.  There was no 
data plate, serial number, or model number present on the turbocharger.  The turbocharger 
contained the part number 466304-0003.  The oil inlet and outlet fittings were intact and 
showed no signs of oil leakage.  This turbocharger was torn down and inspected.  The 
inspection revealed the turbine wheel shroud had fragmented as a result of a fatigue failure.  
The back surface of the shaft and wheel assembly contained contact signatures from the 
shroud.  A review of maintenance records showed that both the left and right turbochargers 
were installed on June 21, 1988.  The data plate on the left turbocharger matched the 
information in the maintenance records.  Without a serial number on the right turbocharger, it 
could not be verified that this was the same one that was installed on June 21, 1998.  However, 
the maintenance logs provided did not contain a record of the turbocharger having been 
replaced after that date.
The fatigue failure of the turbocharger shroud which resulted in oil starvation to the engine.  A 
factor was the muddy field.
On November 3, 2006, at 0720 central standard time, a Piper PA-46-310P, N460TM, collided 
with the terrain during an off airport forced landing in Chester, Illinois, following a loss of 
engine power.  The pilot was not injured.  The airplane sustained substantial damage.  The 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological 
conditions and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from Cape 
Chicago, Illinois.
The pilot reported that after reaching a cruising altitude of 9,000 feet the engine "missed" and 
the oil pressure, oil temperature, and manifold pressure began to drop.  He stated he turned on 
the low pressure fuel boost pump to try and increase the manifold pressure.  
The pilot stated he contacted air traffic control and requested a turn to the nearest airport.  He 
turned toward the airport and maintained a 500 to 800 foot per minute descent.  Once he 
realized he was not going to make it to the airport he chose a field in which to land.  He stated 
he cleared the trees, which surrounded the field, and applied flaps to slow the airplane.  The 
field was muddy so the pilot used the emergency gear extension to lower the landing gear so 
the airplane would not slide into the trees.  The airplane touched down and slid approximately 
25 feet prior to coming to rest.  
The left wing was pulled loose from the fuselage, the left and right flaps sustained impact 
damage, and the landing gear was destroyed.
The engine was torn down and inspected.  This inspection revealed that both halves of the 
crankcase contained holes in line with the number four cylinder.  The crankshaft and 
counterweight assembly showed signs of thermal and mechanical damage at the number four 
and five connecting rod journals.  The number four and five connecting rod journals also 
showed signs of thermal and mechanical damage.  The oil transfer passages were not blocked 
and the oil transfer collar was intact.  The number four connecting rod exhibited thermal and 
mechanical damage and was fractured through the base of the I-beam.  Only fragments of the 
number four connecting rod cap, rod bolts, nuts, and bearing were found.  The number five 
connecting rod assembly also sustained thermal damage.  
A hole was noted in the turbine wheel shroud on the hot section of the right turbocharger.  
There was no data plate, serial number, or model number present on the turbocharger.  The 
turbocharger did contain the part number 466304-0003.  The oil inlet and outlet fittings were 
intact and showed no signs of oil leakage.  This turbocharger was sent to Kelly Aerospace for 
teardown and inspection.  The inspection revealed the turbine wheel shroud had fragmented as 
a result of a fatigue failure.  The back surface of the shaft and wheel assembly contained contact 
signatures from the shroud.  
The airplane had been operated in Australia under the registration of VH-BTZ.  Maintenance 
records showed that both the left and right turbochargers were installed on June 21, 1988, at 
an aircraft total time of 1,527.9 hours and that the mandatory life limit on the turbochargers 
was 2,000 hours.  The total airframe time at the time of the accident was about 2,830 hours.  
The data plate on the left turbocharger matched the information in the maintenance records.  
Without a serial number on the right turbocharger, it could not be verified that this was the 
same one that was installed on June 21, 1998.  However, the maintenance logs provided did not 
contain a record of the turbocharger having been replaced after that date.
