The airplane collided with power lines while flying at low altitude over a river and descended 
into the water below.  Witnesses observed the airplane flying low over a prolonged period in 
the area of a dam and along the river below the dam.  One witness noted that the airplane 
appeared to be lower than the surrounding hills.  Power lines are situated just south of the dam 
and proceed along the south-side of the river.  The power lines cross the river to its north side 
at a point where the river makes a "U" shaped 180-degree turn, heading north momentarily 
and then reversing course to the south.  The power lines cross the river in the southward leg of 
the "U" shape.  The terrain in the middle of the "U" shape is about 150 feet higher than the 
river, which would likely block the view of the south flowing leg of the river, and perhaps the 
power line, from a pilot following the river at low altitude.  The power line's wires were found 
frayed and damaged in the stretch that crossed the river.  The airplane came to rest in the river 
near the power line crossing.  Examination of the wreckage found that the right wing of the 
airplane contacted and was severed by the power line.  No mechanical malfunctions or failures 
were found during the examination of airframe and engine.
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from power lines while intentionally flying at a low 
altitude.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 02, 2006, at 0816 mountain standard time, an Olson Vans RV-6, N606RV, 
collided with power lines and came to rest inverted in the Verde River near Rio Verde, Arizona.  
The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
private pilot and passenger were fatally injured.  The airplane sustained substantial damage.  
The local personal flight originated from Phoenix Deer Valley Airport, Phoenix, Arizona, about 
0700.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed.
A helicopter was dispatched after Arizona Public Service received a report of a temporary 
power outage that occurred at 0816.  The helicopter pilot stated that he overflew wires adjacent 
to the Verde River around 1340.  He observed a white airplane wing about 2 miles downstream 
(southwest) from the Bartlett Dam.  The wing was positioned 200 yards from a power 
transmission line that ran crossed the river.  He noted a 10-foot section of the line's wires had a 
black coloration and appeared severely frayed.  The pilot added that the frayed section was 
situated between the transmission towers, which were spaced about every 0.25 miles.
The airplane came to rest inverted, in an active river that consisted of fresh water 8 to 10 feet 
deep.  
In a telephone interview with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge 
(IIC), a witness reported that he lived about 4 to 5 miles from the accident site.  He stated that 
the morning of the accident, he was outside his residence and observed an airplane flying from 
the east-northeast direction.  He noted that the area normally has small airplanes passing 
through, but the subject airplane appeared to be flying quite low, about 500 feet above ground 
level (agl).  He observed the airplane make a 90-degree left turn and continue toward the 
Bartlett Dam.  He added that he saw the airplane making altitude oscillations, climbing and 
descending in 50-foot increments.  
Two additional witnesses, who were camping near Bartlett Dam, spoke to the Safety Board IIC.  
Both stated that they observed the airplane flying low toward the west, following the turns of 
the river.  One witness noted that the airplane appeared to be lower than the surrounding hills.
PILOT INFORMATION
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Airman and Medical records files, the 
pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for single engine land airplane.  He 
additionally held a repairman experimental aircraft builder certificate.  The pilot was issued a 
third-class medical certificate in February 2005, with no limitations.
No personal flight records were recovered for the pilot, with the exception of a copy of two 
logbook pages.  The last entry was dated July 02, 2005; at that date the logbook pages 
indicated that the pilot's total time was 920.4 hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The RV6 single engine kit airplane, serial number 21778, was completed in 2003 by the 
accident pilot.  An engine identification data plate was not affixed on the engine, but records 
indicated it was a four cylinder Textron Lycoming O-320-A2A (serial number L38687-27A) 
equipped with a Sensenich propeller (serial number 34558K).  According to the maintenance 
records, the airframe had accumulated a total time in service of 245.9 hours.  The most recent 
condition inspection was signed by the pilot, as completed on July 01, 2006.  
The FAA records indicated that the pilot had successfully accomplished both Phase One and 
Phase Two of the experimental operating limitations, with the later completed on April 23, 
2003.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT
Bartlett Lake is located 48 miles northeast from downtown Phoenix.  The Verde River 
continues from the Bartlett Dam and runs in a south-southwest direction.  Power lines are 
situated just south of the dam and initially progress on the south-side of the river.  Maintaining 
a southwest course, about 1.5 miles southwest of the dam, the power lines cross the river to its 
north side and continue to the Phoenix area. 
The Verde River follows a fairly straight southwest course from the dam for about 1.5 nautical 
miles (nm).  In that vicinity, the river makes a "u" shape turn, heading north momentarily and 
then reversing course to the south; the terrain in the middle of the "u" shape is about 150 feet 
higher than the river.  The power lines cross the river in the southward leg of the "u" shape.  
The wires that were frayed and damaged were located in the stretch that crossed the river. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL
The Maricopa County Office of the Medical Examiner performed autopsies on both the pilot 
and passenger.  The FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicological testing on both occupants.  The specimens tested negative for carbon 
monoxide, cyanide, and ethanol.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
A Safety Board investigator examined the wreckage on April 3, 2007, at Air Transport, 
Phoenix, Arizona.  The wreckage had been recovered and placed into storage prior to the 
examination.  According to Air Transport personnel, the water was not drained from the engine 
following its removal from the river.  
Airframe 
The cockpit area of the RV6 sustained extensive damage consistent with impact.  All major 
portions of the control surfaces were identified, excluding the right elevator, which was not 
located.  The right horizontal stabilizer was separated from the structure.  The rudder and left 
horizontal stabilizer were attached to the main wreckage.  The left wing was intact and 
remained attached to the main spar.  At the right wing position, the main spar was curled aft 
and the right wing was separated at its root and in multiple pieces.  At the fuel tank, the right 
wing contained sooting.  A 1-foot portion of the tank that contained the fuel cap did not have 
any sooting.  This section was separated from the sooted section by a tear in the aluminum 
upper and lower wing skins.  The wing section immediately behind the fuel tank had been 
separated, and was twisted and deformed at its center section.  The flap remained attached.  An 
outboard portion of the wing included the aileron control surface.
 
Control cables were traced from the cockpit area, aft to the rudder.  The push pull tube from 
the horizontal stabilizer was connected at the control surface, and was continuous until the 
cockpit area where it had separated with the cockpit structure.  Movement of the left side 
control stick produced corresponding movement to the left aileron.  The right aileron push pull 
tube was fractured where the left wing separated.
Engine
The engine remained attached to the firewall.  The investigator removed the spark plugs.  Upon 
removal of the bottom spark plugs, water and hard, rust-colored material pieces drained from 
the cylinders through the spark plugs holes.  The spark plug electrodes were rust colored and 
contained the rust-colored material.  After the spark plugs were cleaned, their gapping 
appeared similar and the electrodes were oval in shape.  The valve covers were removed.  All 
coloration on the valve covers was similar and there was no dark coloration evident.  Upon 
manual rotation of the propeller, the valves moved in sequence and produced similar amounts 
of lift.  Thumb compression was obtained on all cylinders.  The ignition harnesses sustained 
impact and water damage and did not produce spark.  The magnetos were removed and turned 
freely.  Oil was present on the gearing to the accessory case.
The carburetor sustained impact damage and the bowl was not located.  The floats and needle 
were crushed.  The throttle and mixture control cables were traced from the carburetor to the 
cockpit control arms.  The carburetor heat cable was connected at the cockpit control; however, 
it had been separated from the carburetor heat assembly at the engine.
The gascolator was removed from the firewall and fuel was drained from it.  The fuel was light 
blue in color and consistent in odor to that of 100 low lead (LL).  There were no contaminants 
noted in the gascolator bowl, the screen, and the fuel obtained from the gascolator.
Water was found throughout the engine.  The oil sump was intact and contained a residual 
amount of oil.  The oil filter was removed and water drained from it.  The oil filter was dated 
March 15, 2005.  The tachometer time written on the filter housing was 2.00.
The Sensenich propeller was fixed-pitch and 2-bladed.  One of the blades was missing its tip.  
The other blade was not damaged.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Phoenix VFR Terminal Area Chart, dated October 26, 2006 (35th edition), pictorially 
depicted the power lines, showing them crossing the river at the area where the wires were 
compromised. 
