National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Shelby Gap, KY
Accident Number: NYC06LA214
Date & Time: 09/02/2006, 1015 EDT
Registration: N6401G
Aircraft: Cessna 150K
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The non-instrument rated private pilot was attempting a cross-country flight, when the airplane impacted mountainous terrain.
A witness reported that he heard the airplane circling, but could not see it due to fog.
The witness heard the engine continually running, and then heard the sound of impact.
Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact mechanical malfunctions.
The reported weather near the accident site, about the time of the accident, included an overcast ceiling at 600 feet.
There was no record of the pilot receiving a weather briefing from Flight Service.
The pilot's most recent FAA medical certificate was issued more than 15 years prior to the accident, and he did not report any medications or abnormal medical history on his application.
Toxicological testing indicated the pilot had taken pain medication, and his autopsy report noted evidence of previous coronary artery bypass; however, the report did not support or refute any possible impairment or incapacitation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper decision to attempt a visual flight rules flight in instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in an impact with mountainous terrain.
A factor was the low ceiling.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING 2.
(C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY Factual Information On September 2, 2006, about 1015 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150K, N6401G, was destroyed during a collision with mountainous terrain and subsequent postcrash fire, while maneuvering near Shelby Gap, Kentucky.
The certificated, non-instrument rated, private pilot was fatally injured.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that departed a private airstrip in Brasstown, North Carolina; destined for Big Sandy Regional Airport (K22), Prestonsburg, Kentucky.
No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
A witness was hunting near the accident site, and heard a small airplane overhead.
The witness stated that he could not see the airplane due to fog, but heard the airplane circle back.
He then heard the sound of trees breaking, followed by the sound of impact.
The witness further stated that he heard the engine running until the sound of impact.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector did not reveal any preimpact mechanical malfunctions.
The FAA inspector stated that the aircraft and pilot logbooks were not recovered.
There was also no record of the pilot receiving a weather briefing from Flight Service.
An autopsy was performed by the Pike County Coroner's Office, Pikeville, Kentucky.
Toxicological testing was conducted on the pilot at the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
Evidence of previous coronary artery bypass surgery was noted in the autopsy report.
The pilot's wife added that he also experienced pain from both arms due to a car accident, and knees due to construction work.
Review of FAA medical records revealed that the pilot's most recent third class medical certificate was issued on August 27, 1991.
On the application for that medical certificate, he reported "No" for use of any medication and all medical history items.
He also reported 1,200 hours of total flight experience.
The reported weather at an airport approximately 16 miles south of the accident site, at 1019, was:  wind calm; visibility 10 miles; overcast ceiling at 600 feet; temperature 63 degrees F; dew point 57 degrees F; altimeter 30.06 inches Hg.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
