National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Hampshire, IL
Accident Number: CHI06CA252
Date & Time: 09/02/2006, 1600 CDT
Registration: N12YA
Aircraft: LET Blanik L-13
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The glider sustained substantial damage when it ground looped and skidded to a stop while landing at a grass airstrip.
The pilot reported that after releasing from the tow airplane at 3,000 feet above ground level (agl), no thermal lift was encountered so he returned to the airstrip for landing.
He reported that he experienced a sink rate that "seemed very excessive" during the downwind leg.
He "cut the pattern short" and turned onto the base leg, which resulted in the glider being high on the base leg.
The pilot reported that he deployed the spoilers, but he was slow to retract the spoilers due to the "heavy force required to push the handle forward."
The glider lost altitude.
The pilot reported that the left wing caught the grass about the same time the glider touched down with the nose about 20 degrees off the runway heading.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate approach for landing and his failure to attain a proper descent rate.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) PLANNED APPROACH - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) PROPER DESCENT RATE - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 0 Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: ELT: Engine Model/Series: Registered Owner: Sky Soaring Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
