National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Banning, CA
Accident Number: LAX02LA035
Date & Time: 12/01/2001, 1130 PST
Registration: N31BN
Aircraft: Classic Aircraft Corp. WACO YMF
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane lost power on final approach for landing and impacted rocky terrain about 1/4 mile from the approach end of the runway.
The pilot stated that he was flying to local airports.
The plan was to do a touch-and-go landing and then depart.
He noted no discrepancies until the second leg of the flight when he was on final.
He had setup for landing, which included reducing power and adding carburetor heat.
On final he smelled fuel.
He noted that an existing headwind had put the airplane farther back on the approach than he had expected, and he realized that he was not going to make the runway.
The pilot advanced the throttle, but did not receive a corresponding power output from the engine.
The airplane came to rest in rocky terrain.
Later examination of the carburetor float revealed that it was cracked and full of fuel.
Furthermore, fuel was leaking around the mixture control, accelerator pump, and in the idle tube area of the carburetor.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: a loss of engine power due to a crack in the carburetor float and leaking portions of the carburetor that resulted in an overly rich mixture.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR FLOAT - CRACKED 2.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - LEAK ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
The airplane, owned and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, sustained substantial damage.
The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal local area flight, and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight originated from the Redlands Municipal Airport (L12), Redlands, California, about 1100.
A stop was made at the San Bernardino International Airport (SBD), San Bernardino, California.
The flight was scheduled to terminate at the Redlands airport.
The Safety Board investigator interviewed the pilot.
The pilot stated that he was flying to local airports.
The plan was to do a touch-and-go landing and then depart back to Redlands.
He noted no discrepancies with the flight from L12 to SBD or from SBD to BNG until he was on final.
He had setup for landing, which included reducing power and adding carburetor heat.
He stated that on final he smelled fuel.
He noted that an existing headwind had put the airplane farther back on the approach than he had expected, and he realized that he was not going to make the runway.
The pilot advanced the throttle, but did not receive a corresponding power output from the engine.
The airplane collided with rocks and a berm and came to rest in rocky terrain.
Later examination of the carburetor float by Aircraft Fuel Injection Services, Dallas, Texas, revealed that the float cracked and was full of fuel.
Furthermore, fuel was leaking around the mixture control, accelerator pump, and in the idle tube area.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Registration: N31BN Model/Series: WACO YMF Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Aerobatic Serial Number: F50-067 Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel Seats: 3 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 05/26/2001, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
