National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ardmore, OK
Accident Number: FTW02LA044
Date & Time: 12/01/2001, 1030 CST
Registration: N5226
Aircraft: Bell 47G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot had completed three power recovery autorotations to the south, and the flight instructor was to demonstrate a "full touchdown autorotation" to end the training session.
The flight instructor initiated the autorotation at 1,500 feet msl and 60 knots to the airport's mid-field median.
After slowing to 40 knots, the instructor began a flare to reduce the airspeed to 15-20 knots.
At 10 feet agl, he pulled collective to cushion the landing.
The helicopter touched down on the soft grassy area and slid for approximately 10 feet before starting to nose over.
"The tail of the helicopter pitched upward into the blades, severing it."
The helicopter rotated left approximately 270 degrees before coming to rest upright.
The flight instructor stated that "weather had saturated the ground and caused the sod to be soft on the usual landing area.
It was not visible from the helicopter."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the flight instructor's selection of an unsuitable area for practicing a full touchdown autorotation, which resulted in a nose over.
A contributing factor was the soft ground.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - SIMULATED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 2.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
MISC ROTORCRAFT,MAIN ROTOR/TAIL BOOM CONTACT Factual Information On December 1, 2001, at 1030 central standard time, a Bell 47G helicopter, N5226, was substantially damaged during a practice autorotational landing at the Ardmore Downtown Executive Airport near Ardmore, Oklahoma.
The helicopter was registered to a private individual and operated by Versatile Helicopters, Inc., dba Versatile Aviation of Ardmore, Oklahoma.
The flight instructor and the private pilot rated student were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.
The local flight originated from the Ardmore Downtown Executive Airport, approximately one hour prior to the accident.
The student pilot had completed three power recovery autorotations to the south, and the flight instructor was to demonstrate "a full touchdown autorotation" to end the training session.
The flight instructor initiated the autorotation at 1,500 feet msl and 60 knots to the mid-field median.
After slowing to 40 knots, the instructor began a flare to reduce the airspeed to 15-20 knots.
At 10 feet agl, he pulled collective to cushion the landing.
The helicopter touched down on the soft grassy area and slid for approximately 10 feet before starting to nose over.
"The tail of the helicopter pitched upward into the blades, severing it."
The helicopter rotated left approximately 270 degrees before coming to rest upright.
The flight instructor stated that "weather had saturated the ground and caused the sod to be soft on the usual landing area.
It was not visible from the helicopter."
Flight Instructor Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial; Private Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Helicopter Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 2350 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 18 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 15438 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Franklin ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: 6A-355-B1 Registered Owner: Versatile Helicopters, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
