National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Devils Lake, ND
Accident Number: CHI02LA045
Date & Time: 12/03/2001, 1410 CST
Registration: N248ND
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane contacted a runway light with the left wing following a loss of directional control during the takeoff phase of a touch and go landing.
The student pilot reported the airplane touched down 1/3 (1,800 feet) down the runway during the landing.
He reported the airplane veered to the left when he applied power for takeoff.
He reported he reduced the power to idle and attempted to stop the airplane, but it continued off the side of the runway where it contacted the runway light.
The landing was being made on runway 31.
The winds reported at the airport 5 minutes after the accident were from 160 degrees at 11 knots.
The pilot reported the winds were from 140 degrees at 10 knots.
The student pilot had a total flight time of 31 hours and was on a solo cross-country flight when the accident occurred.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during the takeoff phase of a touch and go landing.
Factors associated with the accident were the student's lack of total experience and the runway light which the airplane contacted.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
TOUCH-AND-GO - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 4.
(F) OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT Factual Information On December 3, 2001, at 1410 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N248ND, operated by the University of North Dakota, collided with a runway light during a touch and go landing.
The accident occurred while the student pilot was landing on runway 31 (5,509 feet by 150 feet, dry asphalt) at the Devils Lake Municipal Airport, Devils Lake, North Dakota.
The student pilot was not injured and the airplane received substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was filed for the solo cross-country flight.
The flight originated from Grand Forks, North Dakota, at 1300.
The student pilot reported that he received the local weather from the automated weather observing system upon arriving in the Devils Lake area.
He then circled the airport to check the windsock prior to entering the traffic pattern for runway 31.
The pilot reported the airplane touched down approximately 1/3 (approximatley 1,800 feet) down the runway during the landing.
He reported the airplane veered to the left when he applied full power for the takeoff portion of the touch and go.
The pilot reported he reduced the power to idle and attempted to stop the airplane; however, it continued off the side of the runway where it contacted a runway light with the left wing.
The winds reported at Devils Lake Municipal Airport at 1415, were from 160 degrees at 11 knots.
The pilot reported the winds were from 140 degrees at 10 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 22, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
