This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Los Banos, CA
Accident Number: WPR19LA039
Date & Time: 12/06/2018, 1230 PST
Registration: N361TC
Aircraft: Beech 36
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On December 6, 2018, at 1230 Pacific standard time, a Beech A36TC airplane, N361TC, 
collided with a fence following a loss of engine power while on approach for landing at Los 
Banos Municipal Airport (LSN), Los Banos, California. The private pilot was not injured. The 
airplane sustained substantial damage to the tail section. The airplane was privately owned and 
operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no 
flight plan had been filed. The flight originated from Reid-Hillview Airport (RHV), San Jose, 
California at 1145
.
According to the pilot, prior to departure from RHV he fueled the main fuel tanks and had 35 
gallons of useable fuel on board. While en route, the pilot planned to practice flight maneuvers, 
and then practice landings at LSN. The pilot reported that he entered the downwind for 
runway 32, and as he made the left base turn, the engine began to sputter and lose power. The 
pilot turned toward the runway and tried to maintain clearance from trees located on the 
outside of the airport perimeter fence, however, the propeller and landing gear struck the 
fence. The airplane came to rest upright about 5 ft from the runway edge. 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Beech
Registration: N361TC
Model/Series: 36 A36TC
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KCVH, 237 ft msl
Observation Time: 1235 PST
Distance from Accident Site: 28 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 16°C / 10°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: Calm / ,
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.92 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: San Jose, CA (RHV)
Destination: Los Banos, CA (LSN)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 None
Latitude, Longitude: 37.063889, -120.869722 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Tealeye Cornejo
Additional Participating Persons: John G Jensen; Federal Aviation Administration; Fresno, CA
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
