This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Fort Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number: ERA19FA060
Date & Time: 12/01/2018, 1326 EST
Registration: N79HP
Aircraft: Cessna 335
Injuries: 2 Fatal, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On December 1, 2018, about 1326 eastern standard time, a privately owned and operated 
Cessna 335, N79HP, impacted the ground and a building during a forced landing shortly after 
takeoff from Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport (FXE), Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The 
commercial pilot and pilot-rated passenger were fatally injured and one occupant of the 
building sustained minor injuries. The airplane was destroyed by a postcrash fire, and the 
building sustained structural and fire damage. The airplane was being operated under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and visual flight rules flight following was 
obtained for the flight that originated about 3 minutes earlier. The flight was destined for 
Hilliard Airpark (01J), Hilliard, Florida.
According to preliminary voice data from the FXE air traffic control tower, the pilot was 
cleared for takeoff and advised that the wind was from 150째 at 18 knots with gusts to 23 knots. 
After takeoff the controller advised the pilot that he was not receiving the transponder and 
provided the transponder code. The controller then instructed the pilot to contact Pompano 
Tower but immediately asked the pilot if he was flying low along the shore. About 1325:27, an 
occupant in the airplane advised, "ground we got a fire left engine turning right back." The 
controller stated say again, and the same occupant advised there was a loss of engine power 
from the left engine and they were turning back. The controller cleared the pilot to land on any 
runway.
Preliminary radar track data indicated the airplane departed Runway 9, turned left and flew in 
a northerly direction until about 1326, when it then turned to the west, followed by a turn to 
the southwest. The airplane continued on a southwest direction for about 10 seconds, turned 
right briefly on a northwesterly direction, then turned left and flew on a south-southwesterly 
direction towards FXE. The airplane proceeded near the accident site and radar data was lost 
about 1326:40.
Examination of the airplane revealed it was nearly consumed in the postaccident fire. The flaps 
and landing gear were retracted. The wreckage was recovered for further examination.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Cessna
Registration: N79HP
Model/Series: 335 No Series
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: FLL, 65 ft msl
Observation Time: 1253 EST
Distance from Accident Site: 8 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 27째C / 21째C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Scattered / 3200 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 16 knots / , 160째
Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 20000 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.98 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: VFR
Departure Point: Fort Lauderdale, FL (FXE)
Destination: Hilliard, FL (01J)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire: On-Ground
Ground Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Explosion: On-Ground
Total Injuries: 2 Fatal, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 26.205000, -80.157222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Timothy W Monville
Additional Participating Persons: Erik M Lee; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Ricardo J Asensio; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Christopher Lang; Continental Motors, Inc.; Mobile, AL
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
