The pilot and passenger departed on a local flight in the amateur-built experimental airplane 
using an intersection departure from the runway. Several frames of a surveillance video that 
captured the airplane during the initial climb from the runway showed a thin white trail of 
vapor/smoke behind the airplane. GPS data recovered from the airplane indicated that the 
airplane climbed to about 100 ft above ground level, leveled off, turned left at the end of the 
runway, and entered a descent. Shortly thereafter, the airplane collided with parked vehicles 
about 0.25 miles from the departure end of runway. Examination of the accident site indicated 
that the airplane impacted in a near-vertical attitude, consistent with an aerodynamic stall.
During examination of the wreckage, no evidence of airframe malfunction or failure was 
detected. The propeller displayed no evidence of rotational damage, consistent with a loss of 
engine power before impact. The engine's turbocharger would not rotate, and the turbocharger 
compressor housing displayed impact marks made by the compressor wheel, indicating that 
there was little relative motion between the blades and the housing at the time of the impact. 
The turbocharger's wastegate system was tested on an exemplar engine, and no anomalies were 
noted. It could not be determined whether the turbocharger would not rotate due to impact 
damage or whether it seized in flight resulting in a partial loss of engine power. Engine test 
runs with a turbocharger in a seized condition could not be conducted. 
The mixture control lever was found near the idle-cutoff position with a corresponding 
witness/impact mark around the circumference of the control stem, indicating that the lever 
was in the cutoff position at the time of impact. It could not be determined at what point 
during the flight the lever was moved to the cutoff position. Attempts to produce white smoke 
from the engine by leaning the mixture to the cutoff position and by inducing a loss of engine 
power due to water contamination were unsuccessful. The exemplar engine's failure to produce 
white smoke when the mixture was leaned suggests that the loss of engine power was not the 
result of the pilot moving the mixture control lever to the cutoff position during takeoff. It is 
possible that the pilot moved the lever to the cutoff position after the airplane departed from 
controlled flight. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
Page 2 of 9CEN15FA249
The circumstances of the accident are consistent with the pilot failing to maintain sufficient 
airspeed following a loss of engine power during takeoff, resulting in the airplane's wing 
exceeding its critical angle-of-attack and a subsequent aerodynamic stall. Instead of using the 
full runway length of 6,179 ft, the pilot elected an intersection takeoff with about 2,570 ft of 
available runway. Calculations showed that, had the pilot used the entire runway for takeoff, 
sufficient runway for a landing following the loss of engine power would likely have been 
available.
The pilot's failure to maintain sufficient airspeed following a loss of engine power during initial 
takeoff climb, which resulted in the airplane's wing exceeding its critical angle-of-attack and a 
subsequent aerodynamic stall. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined 
because examination of the wreckage revealed no mechanical deficiencies. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's decision to conduct an intersection takeoff.
