The pilot reported that, during the long cross-country flight, he stopped at an intermediate 
airport and added 30 gallons of fuel to the airplane. About 15 minutes after departure from that 
airport and while the airplane was cruising at 3,500 ft, the engine lost all power. The pilot 
attempted to restart the engine using the emergency procedures but was unsuccessful. He then 
chose a field for an emergency landing. During the landing on rough terrain, the nose landing 
gear collapsed.
Examination of the wreckage revealed that each wing fuel tank was about half full, and fuel 
drained from the fuel sump did not contain any visible contamination. Subsequent engine 
examination revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions, and the engine was test run 
successfully. 
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because engine 
examination and testing did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
On June 1, 2015, about 1730 central daylight time, a Beech A23-24, N29JR, operated by a 
private individual, was substantially damaged during a forced landing to a field in Grove Hill, 
Alabama, following a total loss of engine power during cruise flight. The airline transport pilot 
and passenger were not injured. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the planned flight to Jack Edward Airport (JKA), Gulf Shores, Alabama. The 
flight originated from Demopolis Regional Airport (DYA), Demopolis, Alabama, about 1715.
The pilot stated that during a cross-country flight, he stopped at DYA and added 30 gallons of 
fuel. About 15 minutes after departure, while cruising at 3,500 feet, the engine lost all power. 
The pilot utilized emergency procedures to restart the engine, but was unsuccessful. He then 
selected a field for an emergency landing due to utility wires surrounding the adjacent roads. 
The pilot also noted that there was an airport he had recently flown over, but it was behind him 
and he could not locate it. As such, he felt that the field was the best option for the forced 
landing. The touchdown was normal, but the field included rough terrain, which resulted in the 
nosegear collapsing before the airplane came to rest upright.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that an 
engine mount and underside fuselage sustained damage. The inspector noted that each wing 
fuel tank was approximately half-full. He drained fuel from the fuel sump and it did not 
contain any visible contamination. Due to the disposition of the wreckage, the inspector was 
not able to examine the engine.
Subsequently, when a recovery company lifted the airplane from the field, the recovery crew 
was able to rotate the propeller and confirm continuity to the rear accessory section of the 
engine, with the sound of the magneto impulse coupling activating. They also attained thumb 
compression on each cylinder.  The engine was later test-run at the recovery facility under the 
supervision of an NTSB investigator. Fuel was plumbed to the fuel pump, the battery was 
replaced, and the exhaust pipe was manually opened to correct impact damage. The engine 
then started and ran continuously at settings between idle and 1,700 rpm, where a successful 
magneto check was performed. Due to vibration as a result of impact damage, a high power 
setting was not attempted.
