Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
EAST MORICHES, NY
Accident Number:
NYC98LA064
Date & Time:
02/01/1998, 1615 EST 
Registration:
N7275E
Aircraft:
Cessna 182
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
After three uneventful parachute drop flights with three or four jumpers each, the pilot landed 
and picked up two jumpers. During the next takeoff roll, the pilot aborted the takeoff and was 
unable to stop the airplane before it struck a fence at the end of the 2,200 foot asphalt runway. 
The pilot stated 'everything was normal, except the plane didn't lift off.'  He also stated, the 
airplane was trimmed to 'lift up on it's own' at about 65 MPH, and he aborted the takeoff at 
about 65 MPH. The pilot used the same elevator trim setting for every takeoff, regardless of 
how many jumpers were in the airplane. Examination of the airplane did not reveal any 
mechanical malfunctions of the airframe or engine. The airplane's elevator trim was found in a 
neutral position. A weight and balance calculation was performed for the accident flight and for 
a departure with four jumpers. The center of gravity (CG) for the accident flight was about 21.4 
inches forward of where the CG would have been located for a parachute drop flight with four 
jumpers. The CG for the accident flight was 101 inches; the airplane's certificated CG range was 
from 95 to 113 inches. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's improper planning/decision, and failure to attain rotation the airplane for lift-off, 
which led to an aborted takeoff and collision with a fence.  The proximity of the fence was a 
related factor. 
Page 2 of 6NYC98LA064
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Findings
1. (C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) ROTATION - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) OBJECT - FENCE
Page 3 of 6NYC98LA064
Factual Information
 On February 1, 1998, about 1615 eastern standard time, a Cessna 182, N7275E, owned 
and operated by Long Island Skydivers Inc., Wantaugh, New York, was substantially damaged 
when it struck a fence, after an aborted takeoff from Spadaro Airport, East Moriches, New 
York.  The certificated private pilot and two skydivers were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the parachute drop flight conducted 
under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a telephone interview, the pilot stated that the accident occurred during his fourth 
flight that day.  The three previous flights, with three or four jumpers each, were uneventful.  
After completing the third flight, he landed and picked up two jumpers.  He then back taxied 
on the runway and began his takeoff roll to the south.  The pilot said that less the half way 
down the 2,200 foot asphalt runway, he aborted the takeoff because, "the airplane didn't feel 
right."  He reduced the engine power, and applied brakes.  The pilot stated the brakes "faded" 
after a few seconds, and he was unable to stop.  The airplane impacted a snow fence at the end 
of the runway.
During a second telephone interview, the pilot said he used the airplane's elevator trim 
so the airplane would "lift up on it's own" during the takeoff roll, "at about 65 MPH."  When 
asked what trim setting he used, the pilot said, he sets the elevator trim "around the 'E' in 
takeoff" that is printed next to the trim wheel for every takeoff, regardless of the number of 
parachutists in the airplane.  The pilot additionally stated, he aborted the takeoff at "about 65 
MPH," and "everything was normal except the plane didn't lift off."
In a telephone interview, one of the skydivers stated he was seated behind the pilot 
facing rearward, the other skydiver was seated next to the pilot facing rearward.  During the 
takeoff roll, he heard the pilot say "It's not coming up, or something like that."  He then heard a 
power reduction and felt the pilot apply brakes.  The next thing he remembered was the 
impact.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector did 
not reveal any mechanical malfunctions of the airframe or engine.  The airplane's elevator trim 
was found in a neutral position.
An airplane weight and balance calculation was performed by the NTSB for the 
conditions during the accident flight, and for a departure with four jumpers.  The weight and 
balance calculations revealed the airplane's center of gravity (CG) with four jumpers was about 
122.5 inches, and during the accident flight the airplane's CG was about 101.1 inches.  A shift 
21.4 inches forward.  According to the airplane's information manual, the CG range for the 
accident flight was about 95 to 113 inches.
FAA Advisory Circular AC61-21A, Chapter 6 "Takeoffs and Departure Climbs" stated:
"...When all the flight controls become effective during the takeoff roll in a nosewheel type 
airplane, back elevator pressure should be gradually applied to raise the nosewheel slightly off 
the runway, thus establishing the takeoff or lift-off attitude.  This is often referred to as 
'rotating.'..."
Page 4 of 6NYC98LA064
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/08/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
290 hours (Total, all aircraft), 220 hours (Total, this make and model), 257 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N7275E
Model/Series:
182 182
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
52275
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/05/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
245 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5140 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-R
Registered Owner:
LONG ISLAND SKY DIVERS
Rated Power:
235 hp
Operator:
DANIEL PALAZZOLO
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC98LA064
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FOK, 67 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1545 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (1N2)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1610 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SPADARO (1N2)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
50 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2200 ft / 20 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
LUKE         SCHIADA
Adopted Date:
12/31/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
JOE   FORRESTO; FARMINGDALE, NY
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC98LA064
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
