National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chicago, IL
Accident Number: CEN15LA334
Date & Time: 08/02/2015, 1437 CDT
Registration: N942AC
Aircraft: CESSNA 208B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Nose over/nose down
Injuries: 2 Minor, 7 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
 Analysis As the commercial flight crew waited for a takeoff clearance on the taxiway, the tower controller asked if they would move aside to allow other aircraft to pass.
As the captain made a right turn, a wind gust lifted the right side of the airplane and turned it clockwise.
The airplane came to rest on its nose and its left wing for several seconds, then fell back upright on all three landing gear.
The engine was secured, and all occupants deplaned through the main cabin door.
Thunderstorms were reported west of the airport, moving east at the time of the accident, and wind gusts to 45 knots were recorded about the time of the upset.
It is likely that the captain did not properly position the flight controls during the turning maneuver, which led to the wind picking up the wing.
The two flight crewmembers and five passengers were not injured; two passengers sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Multi-Aero, Inc., under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 as a scheduled domestic passenger flight.
Day visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed.
The airplane had departed the terminal gate at 1410 and was destined for Southeast Iowa Regional Airport (BRL), Burlington, Iowa.
There had been numerous reports of wind shear and microbursts in the immediate vicinity.
According to the captain and first officer's statements, they were awaiting takeoff clearance on runway 22L when the control tower asked that they move aside to allow other aircraft to pass.
As the captain was making a right turn, a wind gust lifted the right side of the airplane and turned it clockwise.
The airplane remained nose down, resting on its left wing for several seconds, then fell back upright coming to rest on all three landing gears.
The engine was secured, and all occupants deplaned through the main cabin door.
A post-accident examination showed the outboard portion of the left wing was bent up about 30 degrees, the left aileron was damaged, and all three propeller blades were impact damaged.
To the east of the low, a warm front extended across northern Wisconsin and Lake Michigan, into north-central Michigan.
An outflow boundary associated with thunderstorms was depicted just east of the warm front over extreme eastern Michigan into Lake Huron.
There was another large intense-to-extreme area of echoes observed in the vicinity of ORD moving eastward across northern Illinois at approximately 40 knots.
Remarks: Peak wind from 240° at 27 knots occurred at 1402 CDT, thunderstorm began at 1428 CDT, frequent lightning in cloud-to-cloud and cloud-to-ground to the west.
Thunderstorm west moving east, temperature 31.1° C, dew point 19.4° C. ORD's special weather observation at 1443 indicated the wind to be from 250° at 16 knots gusting to 45 knots.
Runway 10L's visual range (RVR) was 700 feet variable to better than 6,000 feet.
Weather: thunderstorm, hail, and moderate rain, scattered clouds at 5,000 feet agl.
Cumulonimbus and scattered clouds at 7,000 feet, broken ceiling at 9,000 feet, and broken clouds at 20,000 feet.
Temperature, 27° C, dew point, 22° C, altimeter 29.76 inches of Hg.
: 8842 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 55 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 357 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Pratt & Whitney Canada ELT: C126 installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: PT6A-140 Registered Owner: Multi-Aero, Inc.
Rated Power: 867 hp Operator: Multi-Aero, Inc. Operating Certificate(s) Held: Commuter Air Carrier (135) Operator Does Business As: Air Choice One, Inc.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91693
