National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Virden, IL
Accident Number: CEN15LA335
Date & Time: 08/01/2015, 1340 CDT
Registration: N502LH
Aircraft: AIR TRACTOR INC AT 502B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of lift
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot reported that the airplane had just been loaded and that he was beginning his sixth agricultural application flight of the day.
He noted that, during the previous flights, the wind was from the southwest-southeast and less than 5 knots.
Before departing on the sixth flight, he checked the wind sock, which indicated that the wind was from the southwest.
He also checked his handheld GPS, which indicated that the local area wind was mainly from the west at 3 to 5 knots.
The pilot started the takeoff roll on the runway heading west and noted that, three-quarters of the way down the runway, the airspeed had not yet reached takeoff speed.
He jettisoned some of the load so that the airplane could clear the corn at the end of the runway.
When the airplane cleared the corn, the pilot ceased the jettison.
However, the airplane then began to descend, so the pilot jettisoned more of the load.
The airplane continued to descend, banked hard left, and impacted the ground.
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical malfunctions with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
The airplane was only about 30 lbs below its maximum gross weight.
Witnesses stated that, immediately after the accident, the wind was from the southeast about 6 knots, which would have resulted in a quartering tailwind during the takeoff.
It is likely that the combined effects of the airplane™s near maximum gross weight and the quartering tailwind degraded the airplane™s climb performance during takeoff.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot™s failure to establish a proper airspeed during takeoff with the airplane near its maximum gross weight and with a quartering tailwind.
The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The airplane was registered to and operated by C & L Holzwarth Inc., Virden, Illinois, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 as an aerial application flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot, the airplane had just been loaded and he was beginning his sixth aerial application flight of the day.
He noted that during the previous flights the wind was from the southwest/southeast and less than 5 knots.
Prior to departure, he checked the wind sock which indicated the wind was from the southwest.
He also checked his handheld GPS which indicated the local area winds were mainly from the west at 3-5 knots.
The pilot started the takeoff roll on the west runway and noted that ¾ of the way down the runway the airspeed had not yet reached takeoff speed.
He jettisoned some of the load in order to clear the corn at the west end of the runway.
When the airplane cleared the corn, the pilot ceased the jettison.
The airplane began to descend so the pilot resumed jettisoning the load.
The airplane continued to descend, made a hard left bank and impacted the ground.
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical malfunctions with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot returned to the airport by car 15 minutes after the accident and checked the wind sock which revealed the wind was from the southeast.
The pilot was uncertain if the wind shifted during the accident takeoff roll.
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector confirmed substantial damage to the fuselage, both wings and empennage.
The airplane came to rest in the corn field; it faced 180 degrees from the direction of departure heading and 1,200 feet from the end of the runway.
Witnesses confirmed that immediately after the accident the wind was from the southeast about 6 knots.
Also, the airplane was being operated within the weight limits.
The maximum hopper load was 4,100 lbs; the hopper weight was 3,897.42 lbs.
The maximum aircraft gross weight was 9,400 lbs; the actual airplane gross weight was 9,367 lbs.
The airport was equipped with a single asphalt runway, 2,640 ft by 100 ft, oriented on a magnetic heading of 090 and 270.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91708
