After discharging three parachutists into a drop zone from about 12,000 feet mean sea level, 
the pilot attempted to return to the departure airport.  The engine began surging as the 
airplane descended through 8,000 feet.  The pilot continued the descent and entered the 
departure airport's traffic pattern.  He misjudged his distance from the runway, and when all 
engine power was lost turning onto the final approach leg he was unable to glide to the runway.  
The airplane impacted terrain about 250 feet short of the landing threshold whereupon it 
nosed over.  Regarding the pilot's qualifications, he was 5 months overdue in his performance 
of a biennial flight review, and he had not flown during the previous 90 days.  The pilot had 
alleged to the firm which used his piloting services that he possessed a commercial pilot 
certificate and had at least 4,000 hours of flight time.  On a May 2000 application for an FAA 
medical certificate, the pilot indicated that he held a commercial pilot certificate and had 8,100 
hours of total flight time.  According to the FAA, no record exists of the pilot holding any 
certificate in the United States other than that of private pilot.  The pilot subsequently reported 
to the Safety Board that he had about 1,905 hours of flight time.  A reconstruction of the fuel 
load carried during the accident flight in concert with the fuel burn off rates revealed that, at 
the time of the crash, the approximate quantity of fuel on board was 4.4 gallons.  According to 
the Cessna Aircraft Company, the unusable fuel for each tank is 2.5 gallons, or a total of 5 
gallons.
Fuel exhaustion during a descent due to an inadequate fuel supply.  Contributing factors were 
the pilot's improper preflight planning, his misjudged altitude while performing the emergency 
landing, and his lack of certificate qualification and recent flight experience/currency.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 3, 2000, about 1526 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 182J, N182DD, nosed 
over during landing at the Paradise Skypark (uncontrolled) Airport, Paradise, California, about 
12 miles east of Chico, California.  The airplane was operated by Skydive in Paradise under 14 
CFR Part 91.  The accident occurred following the pilot's release of his three skydive passengers 
into a nearby drop zone.  The airplane was substantially damaged during the forced landing 
when it impacted terrain short of the runway and nosed over.  The private pilot was seriously 
injured.  The flight originated from Paradise about 1500.
The pilot reported that at 12,000 feet mean sea level (msl) after the jumpers exited the 
airplane, he commenced a descent with the intention of returning to the departure airport.  He 
closed the cowl flaps and turned on the engine's carburetor heat.  At 8,000 feet msl the engine 
began to surge.  The surging continued until the airplane turned onto the final approach leg 
whereupon all power was lost.
A ground-based witness, located about 1/2 mile north of the accident site, reported that he 
observed the airplane enter the traffic pattern and nothing unusual was noted.  The witness 
next observed the airplane on short final approach to runway 35.  The airplane was low to the 
ground, and its wings rocked left and right.  Then, the airplane disappeared from his view and 
evidently impacted the ground.
The airplane owner indicated that he had jumped from the airplane during the flight, and he 
was not aware of any problems with the airplane.  He estimated that, at departure, the airplane 
should have had about 10 gallons of fuel on board.  
The airplane's owner subsequently went to the crash site.  He stated that it looked as though 
the airplane had impacted the upsloping terrain about 10 feet below the runway's elevation.  
An examination of the accident site revealed that the airplane's initial point of impact (IPI) was 
about 100 feet south of runway 35.  The runway has a 150-foot displaced threshold.  The total 
distance between the IPI and the threshold is about 250 feet.
PILOT INFORMATION
In the pilot's accident report, he indicated to the National Transportation Safety Board 
investigator that his total pilot flight time was about 1,905 hours.  During the previous 90-day 
period, he had not flown any aircraft.  The pilot also indicated that his last biennial flight 
review was accomplished on April 29, 1998.  This was about 29 months prior to the accident 
flight.
In the airplane owner's accident report, he indicated his belief that the pilot held a Commercial 
Pilot certificate.  Also, he indicated that the pilot had a total of about 4,000 hours of flight time.
On an application for a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman medical certificate 
dated February 19, 1996, the pilot reported to the FAA that his total pilot time was 1,680 hours.  
Also, he had flown 4 hours during the previous 6 months.
On a subsequent application dated May 3, 2000, the pilot reported to the FAA that his total 
pilot time was 8,100 hours, and he had flown 25 hours during the previous 6 months.  
Additionally, the pilot indicated that he possessed a Commercial Pilot certificate.
According to the FAA, no record exists of the pilot holding any level of United States airman 
certificate other than that of a Private Pilot.
AIRPLANE, WRECKAGE, AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane owner reported that he did not possess any insurance for his airplane.  The 
airplane was not equipped with a shoulder harness for the pilot.  The parachute jumpers who 
were carried on board paid a fee to his company for the jump ride.
The FAA and a representative from the Cessna Aircraft Company examined the airplane.  The 
FAA inspector verbally reported to the Safety Board investigator that no evidence of a 
chronological listing for accomplished airworthiness directives was noted in the airplane's 
maintenance records.  One of the main landing gear tires was "completely" bald.  His 
examination of the propeller revealed little rotational impact evidence.
The airplane's owner reported to the Safety Board investigator that no mechanical 
malfunctions or failures occurred with the airplane during the accident flight.  The engine had 
been operated for about 2,800 hours since last receiving a major overhaul.  One quart of oil 
was added to the engine every 2 to 3 flight hours.  A mixture of automotive gasoline and 
aviation fuel was used in the airplane.
The Cessna Aircraft Company representative reported that no evidence of any placard was 
noted indicating that automotive fuel had been authorized by the FAA for use in the airplane.  
Based upon its reconstruction of the fuel load carried during the accident flight and the fuel 
burn off rates, at the time of the crash the approximate quantity of fuel on board was 4.4 
gallons.  
The Cessna representative further reported that the airplane was equipped with 32.5-gallon 
capacity bladder fuel tanks, capable of holding a total of 65 gallons of fuel.  The total usable 
fuel, for all flight conditions, is 60 gallons.  Unusable fuel for each tank is 2.5 gallons, or a total 
of 5 gallons.
