Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Nacogdoches, TX
Accident Number:
CEN17LA068
Date & Time:
01/04/2017, 1545 CST 
Registration:
N1159G
Aircraft:
MOONEY AIRCRAFT CORP. M20
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot was conducting a cross-country personal flight. He reported that he entered 
the downwind pattern at his home airfield and prepared the airplane to land using the 
manufacturer's checklist, which included selecting the fullest fuel tank, setting flaps to 5°, and 
lowering the landing gear. While on an extended downwind leg, the pilot noticed that the 
airplane had descended to between 700 and 800 ft above ground level, so he added engine 
power to climb back to pattern altitude, but the engine stopped producing power. The pilot 
turned the airplane toward the runway, which he estimated was more than 1.5 miles away. He 
realized that he was not going to be able to glide the configured airplane to the runway, so he 
performed a forced landing to a field but landed short in a wooded area. 
Examination and testing of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation. Maintenance had recently been conducted on the fuel selector's union 
fitting. The mechanic who conducted the maintenance reported purging the lines of air and 
conducting a successful postmaintenance test flight before releasing the airplane to the pilot. 
The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination and testing of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation.
Page 2 of 6CEN17LA068
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN17LA068
Factual Information
On January 4, 2017, about 1545 central standard time, a Mooney M20K airplane, N1159G, 
conducted a forced landing near Nacogdoches, Texas. The private rated pilot sustained minor 
injuries and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to and 
operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated 
without a flight plan. The flight departed the Kerrville Municipal Airport and was about to land 
at the A L Mangham Jr Regional Airport (OCH), Nacogdoches, Texas.
The airplane had recently undergone an annual inspection and the flight was the second flight 
since the inspection. The pilot reported that the preflight and flight was uneventful until he 
entered the pattern to land at OCH. The pilot prepared the airplane to land using the 
manufacturer's checklist, which included changing to the fullest fuel tank, which was the left 
fuel tank, setting flaps to 5° and lowering the landing gear. While on an extended downwind 
leg, the pilot noticed that his altitude dropped to 700 to 800 ft above ground level, so he added 
engine power to climb back to pattern altitude. The airplane's engine stopped producing power 
without any vibrations or sputtering. The pilot turned the airplane towards the runway and 
estimated the distance to be more than 1.5 miles from the end of the runway. He set up best 
glide but perceived that the airplane was descending too quickly to make the runway. The pilot 
performed a forced landing to a field but landed short in a wooded area.
The airplane was moved to a secure location and several engine runs were conducted. Testing 
included scenarios with the fuel lines not purged of air. Engine runs with the left fuel line not 
purged of air, the engine would stop producing power if the pilot did not intervene and either 
activate the boost pump or switch back to the right tank. Testing found that when purged of air, 
the engine operated normally. Examination of the airframe found no anomalies. Examination 
of the fuel selector found no anomalies and each switch position was easily discerned.
The mechanic, who has worked on Mooney airplanes for 48 years, provided a statement 
concerning the work performed on the airplane prior to the accident. During N1159G's annual 
inspection, a discrepancy found were numerous fuel stains throughout the belly panels. The 
source of the leak was determined to be the o-rings on fittings in the fuel selector valve. The 
mechanic was familiar with the fuel selector valve and suspected that the o-rings were 
deteriorated. To perform the required replacement, both fuel tanks were drained and the fuel 
selector valve was removed from the airplane. The fuel selector was not disassembled and the 
four unions were removed. The O-rings were replaced and the fittings were torqued. The 
selector valve was reinstalled and the fuel tanks were refilled with the fuel that had been 
previously removed and filtered. The fuel selector was moved from the off position to the left 
position and the fuel supply to the valve was purged of air thru the gascolator drain valve. The 
selector was then moved to the right position and the right fuel line to the selector was purged 
of air thru the gascolator drain valve. Inspection showed no leaks and after several days was re-
examined and found not leaking. The annual inspection and repairs were completed. The 
mechanic, who is also a pilot, performed a post maintenance flight that included selecting both 
the left and right tanks during the preflight, taxi, and flight portions. He did not detect any 
leaks during the post flight inspection.
Page 4 of 6CEN17LA068
The pilot has owned N1159G for almost 25 years and has at least 941 hours in the airplane 
without a similar incident occurring.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern 
downwind
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
63, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/27/2016
Flight Time:
1522 hours (Total, all aircraft), 941 hours (Total, this make and model), 1474 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MOONEY AIRCRAFT CORP.
Registration:
N1159G
Model/Series:
M20 K
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1982
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
25-0662
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/04/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2362 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C126 installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360 GB
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN17LA068
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KOCH, 355 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1555 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
200°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Overcast / 2400 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
KERRVILLE, TX (ERV)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Nacogdoches, TX (OCH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
A L MANGHAM JR RGNL (OCH)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
354 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Vegetation
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
31.582778, -94.706944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jason T Aguilera
Adopted Date:
06/14/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert McGee; FAA; Houston, TX
Publish Date:
06/12/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94567
Page 6 of 6CEN17LA068
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
