Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
San Pedro, CA
Accident Number:
WPR17FA047
Date & Time:
01/04/2017, 1736 PST 
Registration:
N702JJ
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER R22 BETA
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel related
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The purpose of the flight was to take nighttime aerial photographs of several cruise ships in a 
nearby harbor. The helicopter with the commercial pilot and the passenger/photographer 
aboard departed from the operator's ramp area, and proceeded to the harbor where it made 
numerous orbits. Following the orbits, the helicopter flew toward a jetty, and witnesses on one 
ship reported that the helicopter started spinning as it went straight down into the water. The 
helicopter came to rest upright in about 18 ft of water. All major components of the helicopter 
were recovered except the outboard 3/4 of one main rotor blade. The fracture surface at the 
separation point was jagged and angular consistent with an overstress failure at impact. The 
intact main rotor blade exhibited coning, which was indicative of low rotor rpm at impact. 
There were no rotational signatures between the cooling fan and scroll or the upper sheave and 
the airframe, which indicated that the engine was not operating at impact. Examination of the 
helicopter revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have 
precluded normal operation.
The carburetor heat control knob in the cockpit was in the full down or "OFF" position and 
unlocked. The slider on the carburetor heat airbox was in a midrange position; the airbox was 
deformed, and the slider cable was displaced. At impact, if the airbox moves out of position, it 
will likely stretch the cable, which will move the slider valve. The helicopter was equipped with 
a carburetor heat assist device; lowering the collective mechanically added heat and raising the 
collective reduced heat. If the pilot was not manipulating the collective, the assist device would 
not have an effect. Carburetor heat would only be controlled by the pilot's manipulation of the 
carburetor heat control knob. If the control knob had been up in an "ON" position, it likely 
would have been bent and still up.
The airframe manufacturer has issued safety notices regarding carburetor ice and low rotor 
rpm blade stall. One safety notice stated that failure to maintain rotor rpm can result in low 
rotor rpm stall, and the helicopter can fall at an extreme rate. Another safety notice stated that 
main rotor blade stall due to low main rotor rpm caused a very high percentage of helicopter 
accidents. If the pilot had maintained main rotor rpm, he might have been able to make a 
Page 2 of 8WPR17FA047
successful autorotation and touch down less violently on the water, which might have allowed 
the occupants to egress the helicopter. However, performing an autorotation to water on a dark 
night would be a difficult maneuver.
The meteorological conditions at the time of the accident were conducive for the formation of 
carburetor ice, but the carburetor heat control knob was in the "OFF" position. It is likely that 
the pilot's failure to apply carburetor heat resulted in a loss of engine power due to carburetor 
ice. During the ensuing forced landing, the pilot did not maintain adequate main rotor rpm, 
and the helicopter descended rapidly to impact.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to use carburetor heat while operating in conditions conducive to carburetor 
icing, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. Also causal was the 
pilot's failure to maintain rotor rpm following the loss of engine power.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel control/carburetor - Not used/operated (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Lack of action - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Decision related to condition (Cause)
Page 3 of 8WPR17FA047
Factual Information
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Fuel related (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
On January 4, 2017, about 1736 Pacific standard time, a Robinson Helicopter Company (RHC) 
R22, N702JJ, collided with the water near San Pedro, California. The commercial pilot and the 
passenger sustained fatal injuries; the helicopter sustained substantial damage. JJ Helicopters 
was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The local photography flight departed Torrance Municipal Airport, Torrance, California, about 
1635. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight 
plan had been filed.
The operator reported that the purpose of the flight was to take aerial photos of several cruise 
ships in a nearby harbor.
Recorded radar data showed that the helicopter departed from Torrance Municipal Airport and 
proceeded toward the Los Angeles harbor area. The helicopter made numerous circles, and the 
last portion of the track showed the helicopter on a southeasterly course crossing 
perpendicular to a jetty that terminated at a lighthouse marking the west side of the harbor 
mouth. When the helicopter was southwest of the lighthouse, it made a sweeping left 270° turn 
that went past the lighthouse and then began a slightly curved course parallel to the ocean side 
of the jetty. The last few targets indicate a sharp turn to the right and terminated on the inland 
side of the jetty. The data points for the last 11 minutes recorded mode C altitudes that varied 
between 100 ft and 700 ft.
Numerous witnesses on a cruise ship that was exiting the harbor mouth at the time of the 
accident reported that the helicopter started spinning as it descended straight down into the 
water. One witness commented that it was "just dark enough to make it difficult to see the 
helicopter, all you could see clearly were the [spinning] lights."
Several local agencies initiated a search, and the wreckage was located about 1015 on January 
5, 2017. The wreckage was on the inland side of the jetty, and southwest of the lighthouse at the 
end of the jetty.
Page 4 of 8WPR17FA047
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/09/2016
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/09/2016
Flight Time:
815 hours (Total, all aircraft), 77 hours (Total, this make and model), 705 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
The pilot had 90 hours total time in rotorcraft, and 45 as pilot-in-command in the accident 
make/model. His initial training was in fixed wing airplanes, and all helicopter flight time had 
occurred during the current year.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER
Registration:
N702JJ
Model/Series:
R22 BETA 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
2005
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3791
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/18/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1369 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
11 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5000 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-J2A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Fueling records established that the helicopter was last fueled on January 3, 2017, with the 
addition of 11.9 gallons of 100-octane aviation fuel. The owner flew the helicopter just before 
the accident flight, and said that 15 gallons of fuel remained at the conclusion of that flight.
Page 5 of 8WPR17FA047
Investigators drained the fuel tanks. Clear fluid was in the bottom of the buckets with blue fluid 
on top, and investigators estimated that the 5 gallons of blue fluid looked and smelled like 100-
octane aviation fuel.
The pilot and passenger recorded their weights before takeoff. Based on these weights, the 
operator determined that the helicopter was within both longitudinal and lateral weight and 
balance limitations at takeoff and at the time of the accident. RHC computations concurred 
with this determination. Using weights provided by the coroner, RHC determined that the 
helicopter was slightly out of longitudinal limits at takeoff and at the time of the accident.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTOA, 103 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0147 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
285°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2200 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 20000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Torrance, CA (TOA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Torrance, CA (TOA)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1635 PST
Type of Airspace: 
FAA Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin CE-09-35 contains a graph that illustrates the 
probability of carburetor icing for various temperature and relative humidity conditions. The 
conditions encountered in this accident (ambient temperature 55° F / dew point 52° F, 88% 
relative humidity), were in the area of serious icing at cruise power.
The passenger's camera was examined by the National Transportation Safety Board's 
Recorders Division. Most of the photographs were of Los Angeles harbor and several cruise 
ships in the area. The last photograph was an aerial shot of a cruise ship leaving the harbor 
area and depicted dark light conditions. The helicopter's location was outside of the breakwater 
and lighthouse at the entrance to the harbor.
Page 6 of 8WPR17FA047
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.706944, -118.257778
The local agencies that recovered the helicopter reported that the helicopter came to rest 
upright in about 18 ft of water. The first responder dive team noted that the pilot was in the 
right seat, and the passenger was in the left seat; both victims still had their seat belts fastened. 
The pilot was wearing a helmet and an inflated life vest. All major components of the helicopter 
were recovered except the outboard 3/4 of one main rotor blade. The fracture surface at the 
separation point was jagged and angular. Multiple searches did not locate the missing portion 
of the main rotor blade.
The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat controls were connected at both ends; the airframe 
structure was collapsed around the controls, and they would not move. The throttle arm at the 
carburetor was about 3/4 open. The mixture was in the full rich position. The carburetor heat 
control knob in the cockpit was in the full down or "OFF" position and unlocked. The slider on 
the carburetor heat airbox was in a midrange position; the airbox was deformed, and the slider 
cable was displaced.
There were no holes in the crankcase or cylinders that indicated a catastrophic failure of the 
engine. The tail pipe coloration was light gray with no oil residue. There were no rotational 
signatures between the cooling fan and scroll or the upper sheave and the airframe.
Investigators left the engine in place, and removed the valve covers. They manually rotated the 
crankshaft by turning the fan wheel. The crankshaft rotated freely, and the valves moved about 
the same amount of lift in firing order. The gears in the accessory case turned freely. 
Investigators obtained thumb compression on all cylinders in firing order.
A borescope inspection revealed no mechanical deformation on the valves, cylinder walls, or 
internal cylinder head.
Both main rotor blades were bent down at the hub, and then bent upward about 2 ft out from 
the hub. One blade separated at that point along a jagged angle. The other main rotor blade 
coned upward at that point; it retained its full length but had a tear at midspan from the 
trailing edge to the back of the spar.
Medical And Pathological Information
Page 7 of 8WPR17FA047
The Los Angeles County Coroner, Los Angeles, California, completed an autopsy on the pilot 
and determined that the cause of death was drowning.
Toxicology testing of specimens from the pilot by the FAA's Bioaeronautical Science's Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, were negative for carbon monoxide, ethanol and tested 
drugs.
Additional Information
RHC Safety Notice (SN) SN-10 stresses the importance of instantly adding throttle and 
lowering the collective to maintain main rotor rpm in an emergency. It states that failure to do 
so can result in low rotor rpm stall, and the helicopter can fall at an extreme rate. It notes that 
failure to maintain main rotor rpm is a leading cause of fatal accidents in light helicopters.
SN-18 states that flying a helicopter in obscured visibility or even on a dark night can be fatal.
SN-19 notes that flying over water is very hazardous. It recommends that a pilot maintain 500 
ft above ground level (agl) whenever possible, and avoid maneuvers over water below 200 ft 
agl.
SN-24 emphasizes that rotor stall due to low rpm causes a very high percentage of helicopter 
accidents, both fatal and non-fatal. It states that when rotor stall occurs above 40 to 50 ft, it 
will most likely be fatal.
SN-25 discusses carburetor ice. It stated that carburetor ice could cause engine stoppage, and 
was most likely to occur when there was high humidity or visible moisture, and the air 
temperature was below 70° F. It stated that even in generally dry air, local conditions such as a 
nearby body of water could be conducive to carburetor ice. It stated that during descent or 
autorotation, the pilot should ignore the carburetor air temperature gauge, and apply full 
carburetor heat. RHC published a revision to SN-25 in July 2012 stating that carburetor heat 
may be required on takeoff, and the carburetor heat control knob should be left unlatched 
unless it was obvious that conditions were not conducive to carburetor ice. It also noted that 
carburetor ice could form at outside air temperatures as high as 30° C (86° F).
SN-29 states that there have been a number of fatal accidents involving experienced pilots with 
many hours in airplanes, but limited experience flying helicopters. The ingrained reactions to 
an emergency could have fatal results. All of the pilot's helicopter time was attained in the 
current year and was just over 10% of his total time.
SN-31 notes that the governor can mask carburetor ice. With the throttle governor on, 
carburetor ice will not become apparent as a loss of either rpm or manifold pressure. The 
governor will automatically adjust throttle to maintain a constant rpm, which will also result in 
a constant manifold pressure. It states that when in doubt, the pilot should apply carburetor 
heat as required to keep the carburetor air temperature out of the yellow arc during hover, 
climb, or cruise, and apply full carburetor heat when the manifold pressure is below 18 inches.
Page 8 of 8WPR17FA047
Safety Notice 34 emphasizes that aerial survey and photography flights are high risk.
The R22 Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH) stated that a carburetor heat assist device was 
installed on the helicopter. The device correlated application of carburetor heat with changes in 
the collective setting. Lowering the collective mechanically added heat and raising collective 
reduced heat. The system included a latch at the control knob to lock the carburetor heat off 
when not required. The system contained a friction clutch that allowed the pilot to override the 
system. It instructed the pilot to readjust carburetor heat as necessary following any change in 
power. The POH included "set as required" for the carburetor heat line of the starting engines 
and run-up checklist, and "adjust carb heat as required" to the takeoff procedure in the normal 
procedures section of the POH.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
12/12/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Ben Harris; FAA FSDO; Long Beach, CA
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA
Mark Platt; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
12/12/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94565
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
