Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Elberon, VA
Accident Number:
NYC02LA001
Date & Time:
10/02/2001, 1828 EDT 
Registration:
N673KD
Aircraft:
Clark T Bird II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The engine start, taxi, and run-up seemed normal.  The pilot then tookoff on runway 09, a 
1,800-foot long, 50-foot wide turf runway.  About 50 feet above the ground, the engine lost 
partial power, and the pilot lowered the nose of the airplane.  He then turned right to avoid tree 
stumps, and the airplane impacted in a soybean field, located off the right side of the runway.  
The pilot added that within the 60-day period prior to the accident, on two occasions, he had 
difficulty priming the engine.   However, after each occurrence, the fittings and primer hose 
appeared normal.  The airport manager examined the airplane after the accident.  He observed 
that the primer hose, which connected the fuel primer to both carburetors, was loose.  The 
manager could not be certain if it was loose before the impact, or if the impact loosened the 
hose.  A Federal Aviation Administration inspector examined the engine.  He was able to rotate 
the propeller by hand, and attain thumb compression on both cylinders.  The inspector 
observed fuel in the fuel bowl, it appeared similar to automotive gasoline, and was absent of 
contamination.  Due to safety concerns, the inspector did not attempt to check the spark plugs.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial power loss for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6NYC02LA001
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - CROP
Page 3 of 6NYC02LA001
Factual Information
On October 2, 2001, about 1828 eastern daylight time, a T Bird II amateur built airplane, 
N673KD, was substantially damaged during a forced landing after takeoff from a private 
airstrip near Elberon, Virginia.  The certificated private pilot sustained minor injuries, and the 
passenger sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight 
plan was filed for the local personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated that the engine start, taxi, and run-up seemed normal.  He tookoff on runway 
09, a 1,800-foot long, 50-foot wide turf runway.  About 50 feet above the ground, the engine 
lost partial power, and the pilot lowered the nose of the airplane.  As the airplane descended, 
he then turned right to avoid tree stumps, and the airplane impacted in a soybean field, located 
off the right side of the runway.  The pilot added that within the 60-day period prior to the 
accident, on two occasions, he "had trouble getting the primer bulb to prime."  However, after 
each occurrence, the fittings and hose appeared normal.  
The airport manager examined the airplane after the accident.  He observed fuel leaking from 
the fuel tank onto the ground, and a strong fuel odor was present.  Further examination by the 
manager revealed that the primer hose, which connected the fuel primer to both carburetors, 
was loose.  The manager could not be certain if it was loose before the impact, or if the impact 
loosened the hose.
The airplane was equipped with a Rotax 582 engine.  A Federal Aviation Administration 
inspector examined the engine.  He was able to rotate the propeller by hand, and attain thumb 
compression on both cylinders.  Although the fuel tank was empty when the inspector arrived 
at the scene, he did observe fuel in the fuel bowl.  It appeared similar to automotive gasoline, 
and was absent of contamination.  The inspector added that the fuselage was substantially 
damaged.  Due to safety concerns, he did not attempt to check the spark plugs.    
An excerpt from the manufacturer's make and model engine manual revealed:
"Danger!  This engine, by its design, is subject to sudden stoppage!  Engine stoppage can result 
in crash landings.  Such crash landings can lead to serious bodily injury or death.
Never fly the aircraft equipped with this engine at locations, airspeeds, altitudes, or other 
circumstances from which a successful no-power landing cannot be made, after sudden engine 
stoppage.
Warning!  Although these engine types have undergone considerable durability testing, this 
engine is not a certified aircraft engine.  It has not received any individual safety or durability 
testing and conforms to no aircraft standards.  It is for use in experimental and ultralight 
uncertified aircraft and vehicles only, in which an engine failure will not compromise safety.
User assumes all risk of use and acknowledges by his use the he knows this engine is subject to 
sudden stoppage."
Page 4 of 6NYC02LA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/26/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/26/2000
Flight Time:
509 hours (Total, all aircraft), 49 hours (Total, this make and model), 509 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Clark
Registration:
N673KD
Model/Series:
T Bird II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
900110
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/16/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
49 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
49 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
582
Registered Owner:
Richard B. Clark
Rated Power:
66 hp
Operator:
Richard B. Clark
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC02LA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PHF, 43 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1854 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
60°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Elberon, VA (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1828 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Private (NONE)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
090
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
1800 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
05/01/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
David Burke; FAA FSDO-21; Richmond, VA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC02LA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
