Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Peach Springs, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX05LA155
Date & Time:
05/02/2005, 0945 MST 
Registration:
N3895D
Aircraft:
Bell 206L-1
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
The helicopter descended to ground impact following an interruption of power while 
performing a long line sling load operation.  The purpose of the flight was to sling load fuel 
cans from a landing strip that is located on the rim of the Grand Canyon to the canyon floor 
directly below to refuel the tour boats operating on the Colorado River.  The accident flight was 
the first flight of the day.  The pilot utilized a 50-foot-long line and a net to transfer 15 fuel cans 
down to the canyon floor.  The pilot said that when he picked up the load at the top of the 
canyon (elevation 4,800 feet msl) he performed a power check and the torque required was 75 
percent for an out of ground effect hover.  After stabilizing the load he began a descent to the 
canyon floor below (at an elevation of 1,300 feet msl) and was at a descent rate of about 50 feet 
per minute as he neared the ground.  The wind conditions were reported by witnesses and the 
pilot as being calm, or nearly so.  His head was outside the cockpit watching the ground crew, 
when he heard a tone, and then heard a series of three low frequency popping noises.  The pilot 
said he was unsure if the popping sounds were coming from the engine or from the main rotor 
blades  The helicopter then began to settle toward the ground and descended to a hard impact 
into desert scrub brush.  The pilot said he closed the throttle after hearing popping noises and 
entered an autorotation.  Witnesses to the accident reported that the approach was a controlled 
approach, and there was no sway or other unusual movement in the load.  As a ground 
crewmember reached for the load, about 5 feet above the ground, he saw the helicopter sink 
down and impact the scrub brush and the ground.  The witness did not perceive any unusual 
popping sounds preceding the descent and impact.  The Rolls-Royce 250-C30P engine was 
removed from the airframe shipped to a repair facility with a test cell.  There were no 
significant irregularities noted in the engine test cell runs that were conducted.  Both the power 
turbine governor and gas producer fuel control were tested at the manufacturer's facilities and 
there were no conditions identified that would have prevented normal operation of either unit.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
a loss of power for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 7LAX05LA155
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: HOVER - OUT OF GROUND EFFECT
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. AUTOROTATION - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7LAX05LA155
Factual Information
On May 2, 2005, at 0945 mountain standard time, a Bell 206L-1, N3895D, landed hard in 
desert scrub brush on the Grand Canyon floor near the Grand Canyon West Airport (1G4), 
Peach Springs, Arizona.  Monarch Enterprises, Inc., d.b.a. Papillon Helicopters, operated the 
helicopter under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 133 as an external load long line operation.  The 
helicopter sustained substantial damage.  The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not 
injured.  The ground crew loaders in the landing zone area (LZ) were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that departed 1G4 about 0940.
According to the Director of Operations, the purpose of the flight was to sling load fuel cans 
from 1G4 that is located on the rim of the Grand Canyon to the canyon floor to refuel the tour 
boats operating on the Colorado River.  The accident flight was the first flight of the day.  The 
pilot utilized a 50-foot-long line and a net to transfer 15 fuel cans down to the canyon floor.
In his written statement, the pilot reported that when he picked up the load at the top of the 
canyon (elevation 4,800 feet msl) he performed a power check and the torque required was 75 
percent for an out of ground effect hover.  After stabilizing the load he began a descent to the 
canyon floor below (at an elevation of 1,300 feet msl) and was at a rate of about 50 feet per 
minute as he neared the ground.  The wind conditions were reported by witnesses and the pilot 
as being calm, or nearly so.  His head was outside the cockpit watching the ground crew, when 
he heard a tone, and then heard a series of three low frequency popping noises.  The pilot said 
he was unsure if the popping sounds were coming from the engine or from the main rotor 
blades  The helicopter then began to settle toward the ground and descended to a hard impact 
into desert scrub brush.  The pilot said he closed the throttle after hearing popping noises and 
entered an autorotation.
Witnesses to the accident reported that the approach was a controlled approach, and there was 
no sway or other unusual movement in the load.  As a ground crewmember reached for the 
load, about 5 feet above the ground, he saw the helicopter sink down and impact the scrub 
brush.  The witness did not perceive any unusual popping sounds preceding the descent and 
impact.
Papillon's Director of Operations indicated that the external load weighed about 690 pounds, 
and there was 340 pounds of fuel on board the helicopter.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, conditions at the accident site 
were light winds, about 3 knots or less, with a temperature of 75 degrees Fahrenheit.  The 
accident site elevation was about 1,300 feet.
The engine was a Rolls-Royce 250-C30P, serial number CAE 890182, part number 23004545.  
The total time on the engine was reported to be 12,348.7 hours
The engine was removed from the airframe by Papillon Helicopters maintenance personnel 
and shipped to Aeromaritime America, Mesa, Arizona.  A test cell run was conducted on May 
12, 2005, under the supervision of an FAA Inspector from the Scottsdale, Arizona, Flight 
Standards District Office.  The Aeromaritime engine test cell was neither calibrated nor 
correlated to the Rolls-Royce master at the time of the engine run in Mesa.
The printed results of the engine run on the test stand indicate the difference between the 
horsepower observed in this run and spec horsepower ranged from 2 percent below at takeoff 
Page 4 of 7LAX05LA155
to 4.1 percent above at the Cruise B test point.  
The test stand operator's attempts to conduct acceleration and droop tests were hampered by 
the test cell automatic shutdown point.  The test cell was reported to be set to stop the flow of 
fuel at an arbitrary value of 107.1 percent N2.  The 250-C30 Series Operation and Maintenance 
Manual identifies the N2 limits for continuous operation as varying linearly from 114 percent at 
flight autorotation to 107 percent at takeoff power.  The 15-second transient N2 limitations 
vary from 119 percent at flight autorotation to 109 percent at takeoff power.  In as much as the 
test cell arrested the flow of fuel well below the transient limits listed, no valid conclusion could 
be drawn regarding the operation of the power turbine governor in responding to large and 
rapid power changes.  
There were no significant irregularities noted in the engine test cell runs that were conducted.  
A copy of the test cell results provided by Aeromaritime is included in the public docket 
materials for this accident.  At the conclusion of the test cell run, Papillon Helicopters sent the 
engine to Premier Turbines for disassembly, examination, and repair as necessary to return the 
engine to service.   
In the course of their disassembly inspection in late May 2005, Premier Turbines noted that 
the compressor "bump" clearance was measured at 0.022 inches, 0.007 inches above the 
allowable range established in the Rolls-Royce Overhaul Manual.  Premier reported none of the 
measured pressures recorded during the bleed valve test were within the allowable tolerance.  
These discrepancies were not reported to the Safety Board or to Rolls Royce until after the 
engine had been repaired and returned to service.
Rolls-Royce Model 250 engineering personnel analyzed the results of the engine test cell runs 
as well as the measurements and observations noted during the Premier Turbine disassembly 
and repair of the engine.  The performance difference noted between the two engine runs is 
attributed to the combined effects of the increased clearance and an overboard leak of the bleed 
valve of approximately 1 percent.  The performance degradation is likely to have been a subtle 
onset over time and would not account for the loss of power described by the pilot.  A summary 
of the engineering evaluation is included in the public docket materials for this accident.
Both the power turbine governor and gas producer fuel control were tested by Honeywell in 
South Bend, Indiana, on June 23, 2005.  The Honeywell report concluded there were no 
conditions identified that would have prevented normal operation of either unit.
Page 5 of 7LAX05LA155
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2004
Flight Time:
3586 hours (Total, all aircraft), 762 hours (Total, this make and model), 3514 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 115 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 70 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N3895D
Model/Series:
206L-1 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
45590
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2005, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
21505 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250 C30P
Registered Owner:
Monarch Enterprises, Inc.
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
Monarch Enterprises, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Papillon Helicopters
Operator Designator Code:
PG9A
Page 6 of 7LAX05LA155
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
50 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Peach Srpings, AZ (1G4)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0940 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.983333, -113.766667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye C Cornejo
Adopted Date:
05/29/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Danny Cachero; Federal Aviation Administration; Las Vegas, NV
Rick Thorpe; Rolls-Royce Allison; Indianapolis, IN
Patrick Mallen; Papillon Helicopters; Grand Canyon, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7LAX05LA155
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
