National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Augusta, MT
Accident Number: SEA05LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/2004, 0955 MDT
Registration: N3086R
Aircraft: Cessna 150G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Shortly after takeoff the airplane collided with trees and rising terrain.
In a written statement the pilot reported the airplane collided with trees and rising terrain after departing runway 12.
He reported that the airplane cleared trees (approximately 50 feet in height) located at the end of the departure runway, however, the aircraft made contact with multiple trees and rising terrain beyond the departure end of the runway.
The pilot stated "we hit trees for 150 yards before slowing enough to hit the ground."
The published airport elevation for Benchmark is 5,434 feet MSL.
No mechanical malfunctions or failures that may have contributed to the accident were reported.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain adequate obstacle clearance which resulted in the in-flight collision with rising terrain.
Trees and rising terrain are factors in the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On October 2, 2004, about 0955 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 150G airplane, N3086R, sustained substantial damage after colliding with trees and terrain shortly after takeoff from the Benchmark Airport (3U7), Augusta, Montana.
The airplane is owned by the passenger and was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal/pleasure flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The private pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries in the accident.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight.
In a written statement the pilot reported the airplane collided with trees and rising terrain shortly after departing runway 12 at Benchmark.
The pilot reported the airplane cleared trees (approximately 50 feet in height) located at the end of the departure runway, however, the aircraft made contact with multiple trees and rising terrain beyond the departure end of the runway.
The pilot stated "we hit trees for 150 yards before slowing enough to hit the ground."
The published airport elevation for Benchmark is 5,434 feet MSL.
The pilot reported that the outside air temperature at the time of the accident was 34 degrees Fahrenheit.
No mechanical malfunctions or failures that may have contributed to the accident were reported.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
