National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: New Smyrna Beac, FL
Accident Number: MIA05LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2004, 1440 EDT
Registration: N7059F
Aircraft: Rotorway 162F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the first 20 minutes of the flight had been uneventful, however, as he turned to return to the departure airport, he noticed a power loss, and that the rotor rpm was at the "low green" portion of the operating range.
He said he lowered collective and increased throttle input, but the rpm continued to drop to the "mid- yellow" range.
He initiated an autorotation from about 400 feet AGL, and landed the helicopter in the water.
Examination of the helicopter and its systems did not reveal any preaccident anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to undetermined reasons, which resulted in the pilot entering autorotation and affecting a forced landing to the water.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The private-rated helicopter pilot and passenger were not injured, and the helicopter incurred substantial damage.
The flight originated at Spruce Creek Airport, Daytona Beach, Florida, the same day, about 1415.
The pilot stated that he flew the helicopter southbound along the shoreline, and the first 20 minutes of the flight had been uneventful.
Just after performing a right turn to return to his departure airport, he said he noticed that the rotor rpm was at the "low green" portion of the operating range, so he lowered collective and increased throttle input, but the rpm continued to drop to the "mid- yellow" range.
He said he initiated an autorotation from about 400 feet AGL, and touched down in a level attitude, with zero forward speed and minimum vertical velocity, into the water.
He added that shortly after impacting the water the helicopter rolled 90 degrees to the left, and came to rest in about 3 feet of water.
After recovery from the water, the helicopter was examined, and no anomalies were noted.
In addition, the engine was removed and shipped to the manufacturer, Rotorway International, Chandler, Arizona, and a detailed examination was performed under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
The examination revealed that the engine had accumulated rust consistent with it having been in salt water, however no anomalies were noted.
The Fully Automated Digital Electronic Control (FADEC) was examined by the manufacturer, Electronic Concepts & Engineering, Inc., Holland, Ohio, and the damage sustained as a result of the emersion in salt water did not permit recovery of data.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
