National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ashland, AL
Accident Number: ATL05LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/2004, 0900 CDT
Registration: N40129
Aircraft: Stinson 108
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated they were in cruise flight at 2,500 feet with a private pilot flying the airplane.
The engine began to run rough and shudder.
The pilot stated, "I have the controls" and the private pilot responded, "you have the controls."
The pilot looked for a forced landing area and observed a country road and a field.
He completed the emergency checklist and entered a downwind to land on the highway.
He turned base and observed power poles, but he could not see  any power lines running between the poles and decided to land in the field.
He made a left 35-degree turn towards a  field  and propeller struck a tree, yawed to the left colliding with the ground separating the landing gear and bending the engine firewall.
Examination of the engine assembly revealed the exhaust valve in the No.4 cylinder had failed.
Examination of the exhaust valve revealed fatigue cracks had propagated from opposite sides of the stem adjacent to the beginning of the radius between the stem and the valve head.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A total loss of engine power in cruise flight due to the fatigue failure of the No.4 cylinder exhaust valve.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - FATIGUE 2.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane received substantial damage.
The airline transport rated pilot, private pilot passenger, and one rear seat passenger reported minor injuries.
The remaining rear seat passenger reported no injuries.
The flight originated from Birmingham, Alabama on October 2, 2004, at 0835.
The pilot stated they were in cruise flight at 2,500 feet MSL with a private pilot flying the airplane.
The engine began to run rough and shudder.
The pilot stated, "I have the controls" and the private pilot responded, "you have the controls."
The pilot looked for a forced landing area and observed a country road and a field.
He completed the emergency checklist and entered a downwind to land on the highway.
He turned base and observed power poles, but he could not see  any power lines running between the poles and decided to land in the field.
He made a left 35-degree turn towards a  field  and propeller struck a tree, yawed to the left colliding with the ground separating the landing gear and bending the engine firewall.
Examination of the engine assembly revealed the exhaust valve in the No.4 cylinder had failed.
The No.
4 cylinder and exhaust valve were forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further analysis.
Examination of the exhaust valve revealed fatigue cracks had propagated from opposite sides of the stem adjacent to the beginning of the radius between the stem and the valve head.
The No.
4 cylinder and exhaust valve was returned to the registered owner on January 24, 2005.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
