National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Robbinsville, NJ
Accident Number: IAD05LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/2004, 1430 EDT
Registration: N5507V
Aircraft: Piper PA-34-200T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the takeoff roll, and at an indicated airspeed of about 70 to 75 knots, the pilot felt the nose of the airplane dip and then rise off the ground.
The pilot pushed the control yoke forward to level the airplane; it contacted the runway, and then skidded to a stop.
The landing gear collapsed.
Examination of the airplane revealed that the stabilator trim rod forward attachment hardware and the aft attachment nut were not installed.
Photographs of the stabilator trim tab attachment point showed that it was visible and not obscured by any cowlings or coverings.
The loss of the forward attachment hardware would result in an abnormal response, or "lightening," of the stabilator control.
About 60 flight hours and 11 months prior to the accident, a repair station had removed, repaired, and reinstalled the stabilator trim tab.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The repair station's improper installation of the stabilator trim tab.
A factor was the pilot's inadequate preflight inspection of the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - NOT SECURED 2.
STABILATOR TRIM - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 3.
(C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 4.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local personal flight, conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement the pilot stated that during the takeoff roll, and at an indicated airspeed of about 70 to 75 knots, she felt the nose of the airplane dip and then rise off the ground.
She pushed the control yoke forward to level the airplane, it contacted the runway, and then skidded to a stop.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed that the airplane's left main landing gear was sheared off at the strut, and the right main and nose landing gear were collapsed.
The left main landing gear axle nut was separated from the axle and was found on the runway with the cotter key still attached.
Further examination revealed that the stabilator trim rod forward attachment hardware was not installed.
The bolt and associated nut were not recovered.
The stabilator trim rod aft attachment bolt was in place, but the nut was not installed, nor was it recovered.
Examination of photographs taken by the FAA inspector of the trim rod attachment point revealed that the trim rod attachment point was visible on the underside of the stabilator trim tab, and was not obscured by any cowlings or coverings.
According to the New Piper Aircraft Customer Care Team, with the stabilator trim set at a neutral position and the forward stabilator trim rod attachment bolt not installed, the stabilator would not perform as expected by the pilot.
As airspeed increased, the lift force and hinge moment produced by the trim tab would result in a "lightening" of the stabilator control.
"Normal" pilot effort would result in an unexpected over-rotation.
Examination of the airplane's maintenance log revealed that the airplane had undergone an annual inspection about 60 flight hours and 11 months prior to the accident.
A review of the repair station's work order describing the services performed to the airplane revealed that the stabilator trim tab had been removed, repaired, and reinstalled.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
