National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ponca City, OK
Accident Number: DFW07LA080
Date & Time: 03/01/2007, 0755 CST
Registration: N1554Z
Aircraft: Beech P35
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that the engine lost power when the airplane was established on a 5-mile straight-in final approach.
The 511-hour private pilot elected to turn the airplane toward a level open field located on the airport property.
While crossing the airport's perimeter road, the airplane "clipped" the top of a moving automobile and subsequently impacted a fence.
There was no post impact fire and the pilot was able to exit the airplane unassisted.
An examination of the airplane by an airframe and powerplant mechanic (A&P) under the supervision of the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), did not revealed any pre-impact anomalies.
The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
OBJECT - VEHICLE 3.
OBJECT - FENCE 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE ---------- Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS Factual Information On March 1, 2007, about 0755 central standard time, a single-engine Beech P35 airplane, N1554Z, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power while on final approach to the Ponca City Regional Airport (PNC), near Ponca City, Oklahoma.
The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The 114- nautical mile cross-country flight originated at 0705 from the Clinton Regional Airport (CLK), near Clinton, Oklahoma, and was destined for PNC.
According to the pilot, while on a five mile final approach for Runway 35 at PNC, he reduced engine power to intercept the glide slope.
Once established on the glide slope, the pilot attempted to add engine power.
The pilot reported that when he added throttle, the engine "sputtered" and then experienced a complete loss of power.
The pilot added that he pumped the throttle and switched the fuel selector valve from the left fuel tank to the right fuel tank position in an attempt to restore engine power.
The engine power was not restored.
The pilot elected to turn the airplane towards a flat open field located on the airport property.
While crossing the airport's perimeter road, the airplane "clipped" the top of a moving automobile and subsequently impacted a chain-link fence.
There was no post impact fire and the pilot was able to exit the airplane unassisted.
The driver of the automobile was not injured.
According to photos provided to the NTSB, the airplane came to rest in an upright position on the right main landing gear and the lower engine cowling.
The left wing was separated from the fuselage.
The airplane was later examined by an airframe and powerplant mechanic (A&P) under the supervision of the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC).
The examination revealed the following: A liquid consistent with aviation fuel was present in the left and right fuel tanks.
The airplane's electric fuel pump was operational and displaced fuel when both the left and right fuel tanks were individually selected.
The engine's mechanical fuel pump was removed and examined.
The diaphragm was found intact and no anomalies were noted.
The engine's valve covers and propeller were removed and the engine was rotated via the starter.
Thumb compression was obtained in each cylinder and valve train continuity was established.
The left and right magnetos produced spark to all spark plugs when rotated.
Oil was present in the oil sump.
According to the A&P, no anomalies were noted that would have prevented the engine from producing power.
The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
At 0753, the weather observation facility at PNC reported, wind from 280 degrees at 10 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, few clouds at 2,900 feet, temperature 37 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 30 degrees Fahrenheit, and a barometric pressure of 29.60 inches of Mercury.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
