National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Gustavus, AK
Accident Number: ANC07LA022
Date & Time: 03/03/2007, 1610 AST
Registration: N5134V
Aircraft: Hughes 369D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135.
The purpose of the flight was to tranquilize moose for capture and collaring.
The company's chief pilot said a moose was shot with a tranquilizer dart from the helicopter, and that the helicopter was used to block the moose from moving into a hazardous area.
The pilot of an airplane orbiting above said the moose charged the helicopter, and that as the helicopter attempted to evade the moose, the moose reared, or jumped, contacting the helicopter's tail rotor.
The helicopter pilot reported a loss of directional control, and made a hovering autorotation to the ground.
The flex coupling between the drive shaft and the tail rotor gearbox failed, and the spinning drive shaft cut the tail boom and separated the tail from the rest of the airframe.
According to the chief pilot, the company's practice had been for the helicopter to hover/maneuver about 10 feet above the ground, and no closer to the darted animal than 10 feet horizontally.
He said the pilot and scientist aboard felt the distances were appropriate.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The inadequate clearance from a tranquilized moose while hovering in ground effect, and the operator's inadequate procedures for such operations, which resulted in an in-flight collision with the moose.
Factors associated with the accident were the moose, a sheared tail rotor drive shaft, and the resultant lack of tail rotor anti-torque control.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - ANIMAL(S) 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE 3.
(C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - COMPANY/OPERATOR MANAGEMENT ---------- Occurrence #2: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT Findings 4.
(F) ROTOR DRIVE SYSTEM,TAIL ROTOR DRIVE SHAFT - SHEARED 5.
(F) TAIL ROTOR/ANTI-TORQUE CONTROL - NOT AVAILABLE ---------- Occurrence #3: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 6.
The helicopter was being operated by Temsco Helicopters Inc., Ketchikan, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The commercial certificated pilot and sole passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight following procedures were in effect.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 5, the chief pilot for the operator said the helicopter was involved in a moose tagging operation for the Alaska State Department of Fish and Game.
He said the moose was shot with a tranquilizer dart from the helicopter, and that the helicopter is used to block the moose's path to prevent them from running into water and drowning, or running into an area where the tranquilized animals cannot be handled safely.
He said the helicopter was hovering, waiting for the animal to "go down."
The chief pilot said that the pilot of an airplane was orbiting above, and saw the moose charge the helicopter.
According to the chief pilot, the airplane pilot stated that as the helicopter attempted to evade the moose, the moose reared, or jumped, contacting the helicopter's tail rotor.
The airplane pilot said that the helicopter made three complete 360 degree rotations before it landed.
The helicopter pilot reported that he was not aware that the moose contacted the tail rotor.
He indicated he had a loss of directional control, and said that he made a hovering autorotation to the ground.
According to the chief pilot, the flex coupling between the drive shaft and the tail rotor gearbox failed.
He said the spinning drive shaft cut through the tail boom adjacent to the gearbox, and separated the tail from the rest of the airframe.
On April 2, the chief pilot told the IIC that their past practice had been for the helicopter to hover/maneuver about 10 feet above the ground, and no closer to the darted animal than 10 feet horizontally.
He said this past practice had served them well, and the pilot and scientist aboard the helicopter felt the distances were appropriate.
He said this was the first incidence of extreme, erratic, behavior on the part of a darted animal.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated March 14, the chief pilot reported that due to this incident, the company had revised its procedure, and now requires the pilot to maintain 30 feet of altitude above the ground, and 30 feet horizontally from a darted animal.
: 3000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time: 9041 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: 250C20B Registered Owner: Temsco Helicopter Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
