The pilot made an uneventful 45-minute cross country flight from his home airport to the 
destination airport. About 10 minutes into the return flight, the airplane was cruising over 
water at 2,000 feet mean sea level when it experienced a total loss of engine power. The pilot 
attempted to glide to an island and performed emergency procedures; however, he did not 
verify the position of the fuel tank selector. The airplane glided about 2 miles before ditching in 
the water. The airplane was equipped with main and auxiliary fuel tanks that held 26 and 9 
gallons of fuel, respectively, and the engine burned about 9 gallons of fuel per hour; the pilot 
reported that both tanks were full when he departed from his home airport. The pilot further 
reported that, if he had accidentally left the fuel selector positioned to the auxiliary fuel tank 
prior to departing his home airport, he would have had just enough fuel to fly the outbound leg, 
begin the return leg, and lose engine power where he did. When the airplane was recovered, 
the fuel selector was found positioned to the auxiliary fuel tank. Examination of the wreckage 
did not reveal any preimpact mechanical malfunctions. In the pilot™s operating handbook for 
the airplane, the procedure for an engine failure during flight stated that, for airplanes 
equipped with an auxiliary fuel tank, the pilot should ascertain that the fuel selector valve is on 
a tank containing fuel. 
The pilot's improper fuel management in that he did not verify the fuel selector position before 
beginning the flight or after the power loss, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due 
to fuel starvation and subsequent ditching.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 2, 2011, at 1513 eastern daylight time, a Temco GC-1B (Swift), N3825K, operated 
by a private individual, was substantially damaged during a ditching in the Chesapeake Bay, 
near Ewell, Maryland. The certificated airline transport pilot received serious injuries and the 
passenger was fatally injured. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the planned flight to Washington Executive Airport (W32), Clinton, 
Maryland. The flight originated from Tangier Island Airport (TGI), Tangier, Virginia, about 
1500. 
During a subsequent telephone interview with a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector, the pilot stated that prior that day, he flew uneventfully from W32 to TGI. During 
the return flight, the airplane was cruising at 2,000 feet mean seal level to remain below an 
overcast cloud layer at 2,200 feet. About 10 minutes after departure, while flying over water, 
the airplane experienced a total loss of engine power. At that time, the pilot was in radio 
contact with air traffic control, and advised of his emergency. The controller acknowledged the 
transmission and provided a vector to the nearest land, which was Smith Island, Maryland, 
about 6 miles east of the airplane. While gliding toward the island, the pilot performed 
emergency procedures, which included activating the carburetor heat, checking the magnetos, 
activating the fuel boost pump, and positioning the mixture to rich. The pilot did not mention 
switching the fuel tank selector position as part of the procedure. He remarked that if he had 
accidentally left the fuel selector positioned to "Aux," prior to departing W32, he would have 
had just enough fuel to fly from W32, to TGI, and lose engine power near Smith Island. 
The pilot added that his airplane did not have a good glide ratio, and estimated that he only 
glided about 2 miles before ditching in the water. Other airplanes and helicopters circled the 
area about 20 to 30 minutes after ditching; however, the pilot and passenger were wearing 
dark clothes and were not seen. The pilot and passenger then attempted to swim to Smith 
Island. The waves were high and the passenger was unable to complete the swim. 
The wreckage was located on October 6, 2011, by the Maryland Department of Natural 
Resources. It was resting in 25 feet of water, about 2 miles west of Smith Island. 
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot, age 48, held an airline transport pilot certificate, with a rating for airplane 
multiengine land. He also held a commercial pilot certificate, with a rating for airplane single-
engine land. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on December 3, 
2009. The pilot reported a total flight experience of 6,800 hours; of which, 130 hours were in 
single-engine airplanes. Of the 130 hours, 120 hours were in the same make and model as the 
accident airplane. The pilot had flown the make and model accident airplane 8 hours during 
the 30-day period preceding the accident. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The two-seat, low-wing, retractable-gear tailwheel airplane, serial number 3514, was 
manufactured in 1948. It was powered by a Continental O-300, 145-horsepower engine, 
equipped with a fixed-pitch wooden propeller. The airplane's most recent annual inspection 
was performed on March 25, 2011. At that time, the airframe had accumulated 4,470 total 
hours of operation and the engine had accumulated 85 hours since overhaul. The airplane flew 
35 hours from the time of the last annual inspection, until the accident.
The airplane's fuel selector had three positions; "AUX," "MAIN," and "OFF." The auxiliary fuel 
tank held 9 gallons of fuel and the main fuel tank held 26 gallons of fuel. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Patuxent River Naval Air Station (NHK), Patuxent River, Maryland, was located about 15 miles 
northwest of the accident site. The recorded weather at NHK, at 1452, was: wind from 250 
degrees at 9 knots; visibility 10 miles in light rain; few clouds at 2,000 feet, broken ceiling at 
3,600 feet, overcast ceiling at 4,400 feet; temperature 11 degrees C; dew point 8 degrees C; 
altimeter 29.88 inches of mercury. 
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The wreckage was recovered from Chesapeake Bay on November 26, 2011 and examined at a 
recovery facility. Underwater video recorded just prior to recovery revealed that the fuel 
selector was found in the "AUX" position. Additionally, the fuel selector was noted in the 
"AUX" position at the recovery facility. The engine had separated during recovery. The 
empennage had also separated and was not recovered. Both wings were intact and remained 
attached to the fuselage. The fuel tanks were breached and contained saltwater. The right 
aileron was up and the left aileron was down. The left and right flaps were partially extended. 
Control continuity was confirmed from the yoke to the ailerons. Rudder control continuity was 
confirmed from the pedals in the cockpit to the cable cuts at the point the empennage was 
separated. Elevator control continuity could not be confirmed due to lower fuselage impact 
damage. 
Examination of the engine revealed that the left magneto had separated and the right magneto 
remained attached. One wooden propeller blade had separated about 1-foot outboard of the 
propeller hub and the other wooden propeller blade remained attached. The valve covers and 
sparkplugs were removed for examination. The sparkplug electrodes were intact with no 
preimpact debris noted. When the propeller was rotated by hand, camshaft, crankshaft, and 
valvetrain continuity were confirmed. Additionally, thumb compression was attained on all 
cylinders. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the passenger on October 4, 2011, by the Virginia Department of 
Health, Office of The Chief Medical Examiner, Norfolk, Virginia. The cause of death was noted 
as, "drowning; contributing, multiple blunt trauma."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Review of the make and model engine operator's manual revealed that the average fuel burn 
for the engine was 9.27 gallons-per-hour during cruise flight. 
Review of a pilot operating handbook for the make and model airplane revealed:
"Engine Failure During Flight
If airplane is equipped with auxiliary fuel tank, ascertain that fuel selector valve is on tank 
containing most fuel–"
