Witnesses reported that they observed the airplane flying low above the beach before it 
ascended abruptly. When the airplane was about 150 to 200 feet above the ground, the ascent 
stopped, and the airplane then descended in a nose low attitude to ground impact. Witnesses 
also reported that the engine sounded normal during the accident sequence. Postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or 
failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
The pilot had a reported history of marijuana abuse. Toxicology testing on the pilot was 
positive for tetrahydrocannabinol at levels that indicate he was likely impaired during the 
flight. This impairment likely affected the pilot™s ability to maintain airplane control and his 
decision to begin a low-level flight maneuver at an altitude that was not sufficient for recovery 
before impact with the ground. 
The pilot™s failure to maintain airplane control and his improper decision to begin a low-level 
maneuver at an altitude that was not sufficient for recovery before ground impact. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s impairment from marijuana use.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2013, about 1605 Pacific standard time, a Luscombe 8A, N45923, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain about 2 miles south of the Oceano County 
Airport (L52), Oceano, California. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was 
registered to, and operated by, the pilot as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 local 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The 
flight originated from L52 at an unknown time. 
Witnesses reported that they observed the airplane flying low above the beach when it 
ascended abruptly. When the airplane was approximately 150-200 feet above the ground, it 
appeared to stop and descended abruptly before it impacted the sand dunes below. The 
witnesses did not see the initial impact, but they observed the airplane bounce. Witnesses 
reported that the engine sounded normal during the accident sequence. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
At the time of the accident, the pilot, age 56, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane 
single- and multi-engine land privileges. The pilot also held an airframe and powerplant 
mechanics certificate. The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second 
class medical was issued on October 1, 2012 with the restriction that he must possess glasses 
for near and intermediate vision. During his examination, the pilot reported he had a total of 
7,000 flight hours, 185 of which were within the six months preceding the examination. The 
pilot's logbooks were not located.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The two-seat, high-wing, fixed-gear airplane, serial number 2450, was manufactured in 1946. 
It was powered by a Continental Motors A-65-8, 65 horsepower engine and was equipped with 
a fixed-pitch propeller. The airplane's maintenance logbooks were not located. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest weather reporting station, San Luis Obispo Regional Airport (SBP), located 
approximately 10 miles north of the accident site reported at 1756, calm wind, 10 statute miles 
of visibility, clear skies, temperature 17 degrees C, dewpoint -6 degrees C, and an altimeter 
reading of 30.08 inches of mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT
The wreckage debris path was approximately 720 feet long with a heading of about 19 degrees. 
The first identified point of impact was a divot on the ridge of a sand dune that was consistent 
with a tire mark. Almost immediately following the initial point of impact was an about 8 foot 
by 3 foot section of heavily disrupted sand, with three foot wide sliding marks extending 
toward an approximate 2 foot by 6 inch impact point. After the impact point, there was about 7 
feet of undisturbed sand followed by the main wreckage, which was a total of about 120 feet 
beyond the first point of impact. The final piece of debris was a wheel that was located about 
600 feet beyond the main wreckage on the other side of a second sand dune. 
Examination of the main wreckage revealed that the airplane came to rest in a nose low 
attitude. The forward fuselage sustained extensive crush damage, and the cabin area came to 
rest on top of the engine. The aft fuselage and empennage were still attached by the airplane's 
belly skin; however, it was folded underneath the airplane's wings and came to rest inverted in 
the sand. The empennage sustained minimal damage. The left and right horizontal stabilizers 
had a different paint scheme from the rest of the yellow empennage and airframe. The wings 
were still attached to the cabin and mostly intact; both wings sustained leading edge crushing 
throughout. Evidence of corrosion was noted at the wing spar attachment points and scattered 
throughout the remainder of the airframe. Flight control continuity was established from the 
cockpit controls to their respective flight control surfaces. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The autopsy was performed on the pilot by the San Luis Obispo County Sheriff Œ Coroner 
Office in San Luis Obispo, California. The cause of death was sharp force injury and the 
autopsy noted that the pilot had an enlarged heart. Toxicology testing detected 
tetrahydrocannabinol in lung (0.0485 ug/ml), liver (0.011 ug/ml), and blood (0.0062 ug/ml). 
Tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid, was detected in urine (0.0965 ug/ml), liver (0.0369 
ug/ml), blood (0.0067 ug/ml), and lung (0.0053 ug/ml).
The pilot had a history of cannabis abuse with a positive Department of Transportation 
required random test in 1999. The FAA had evaluated his history and determined him to be 
eligible for a second class medical certificate in 2003 and thereafter. Although additional 
random drug tests were recommended, they were not performed. 
For more detailed information see the Medical Factual Report located in the accident docket. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engine Examination
The engine was removed from the firewall and slung from a hoist. Initial visual inspection of 
the recovered engine revealed no visual anomalies. The cylinder rocker covers and spark plugs 
were removed; the spark plug electrode areas were consistent with 'worn out - normal' when 
compared to the Champion AV-27 chart. The valves were undamaged and contained no 
abnormal thermal discoloration. When the propeller was rotated by hand, thumb compression 
was established on all cylinders, all valves moved in sequence and had similar amounts of lift, 
and the accessory gears rotated. The carburetor was fracture separated at the throttle plate 
neck; both pieces of the carburetor were removed from the engine. Sand was found inside of 
the carburetor and was consistent with the sand on scene. Both the throttle and mixture levers 
moved freely from stop to stop when manipulated by hand. The carburetor bowl was removed; 
there was no fuel in the carburetor bowl or the undamaged metal float. The oil screen was 
removed and contained some carbon flakes.
