The flight instructor and her student were practicing autorotations. The student entered a 
practice autorotation at 500 feet above ground level (agl) and at 70 knots. About 40 feet agl, 
the student bled off airspeed by flaring the helicopter. The student advanced the throttle, but 
the rpm started to decay. The instructor had her hands on the controls and added throttle to 
arrest the rpm decay. When the rpm continued to decay, she took the controls and performed a 
hovering autorotation. The helicopter impacted a grassy area next to the runway, bounced, and 
rolled over, coming to an immediate stop. The fuselage and main rotor sustained substantial 
damage. The flight instructor reported that there was excessive play in the left throttle and that 
she had reported the condition to the operator™s mechanic twice previously. Examination of the 
throttle system found it to be in an airworthy condition.
The student pilot™s delayed throttle application during the practice autorotation and the flight 
instructor™s lack of immediate remedial action, which resulted in a hard landing.
On January 2, 2013, about 1810 eastern standard time, a Robinson R22 Beta, N345VH, was 
substantially damaged following a practice autorotation to runway 22 at Peter O Knight Airport 
(TPF), Tampa, Florida. The flight instructor and a student pilot were not injured. The 
helicopter was operated by Helicopter Academy under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and 
no flight plan was filed. The flight originated at Clearwater, Florida (PIE) about 1715.
The flight instructor reported that she landed at PIE to pick up her student and proceeded to 
TPF for approaches and practice autorotations. The first three approaches were uneventful. 
During the fourth approach to runway 22, the student entered a practice autorotation at 500 
feet above ground level (agl) and at 70 knots. About 40 feet agl, the student bled off airspeed by 
making ﬁbaby flares.ﬂ She reported that the student rolled on the throttle, but the governor did 
not catch and the rpm started to decay. The instructor had her hands on the controls and 
added throttle to arrest the rpm decay. When the rpm continued to decay, she took the controls 
and performed a hovering autorotation. The helicopter impacted a grassy area next to the 
runway, bounced, and rolled over, coming to an immediate stop. 
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector responded to the accident site and 
examined the wreckage. The inspector confirmed substantial damage to the airframe. Both 
main rotor blades were bent in several places. The engine firewall was buckled. The tail boom 
was crushed at the fuselage attachment point and the horizontal stabilizer was bent about 90 
degrees. The flight instructor reported to the inspector that there was excessive ﬁplayﬂ in the 
left throttle and she had reported the condition to the operator™s maintenance personnel twice 
previously, and was informed that the play was normal.
On January 8, 2013, the FAA re-inspected the helicopter throttle system with the assistance of 
a technical representative from Robinson Helicopter Company. The inspector reported that, 
based on the description of the throttle rigging provided to the technical representative, the 
throttle was in an airworthy condition.
Recorded weather at PTF at the time of the accident included calm surface wind.
