The non-instrument-rated private pilot departed his home airport with three family members 
on a cross-country visual flight rules (VFR) flight over mountainous terrain. The forecast 
weather conditions called for instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and mountain 
obscuration due to clouds, precipitation, and mist along the route of flight and at the accident 
site. The co-owner of the airplane, who held an instrument rating, had reviewed the pilot's 
flight plan and the forecast weather conditions two days before the accident and informed the 
pilot that he should drive to his destination as the weather would not allow for VFR flight. 
However, the pilot elected to proceed with the flight contrary to the co-owner's 
recommendation. The pilot entered the flight route into the Foreflight mobile application but 
did not receive any weather briefings from flight service or the mobile application before 
departure.
GPS data recovered from an electronic display device installed in the airplane showed that the 
airplane departed, entered a climb on a northerly heading, and maintained this direction for 
the remainder of the flight. After the airplane reached a peak altitude of about 8,000 ft above 
mean sea level (msl), it descended to 7,000 ft msl and then gradually descended to about 6,000 
ft msl, where it remained until near the end of the flight. The airplane subsequently impacted 
the tops of trees on the rising face of a cliff about 6,600 ft msl. The orientation and length of 
the wreckage path were consistent with a controlled flight into terrain impact. Track data from 
the GPS showed that the airplane maintained a straight course after its departure all the way to 
the mountain rim, which had a published elevation between 6,700 feet msl and 8,000 feet msl. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions or failures.
A medical study revealed that each of the 4 fatally injured occupants sustained severe 
traumatic injuries that would have been rapidly fatal. Furthermore, the study showed there was 
no evidence to suggest that faster identification of the accident or earlier medical attention 
would have changed the outcome. 
Page 2 of 11WPR17FA045
Although the autopilot switch was found in the "ON" position at the accident site, the autopilot 
was likely not engaged as the airplane's ground track and altitude varied, consistent with the 
pilot hand flying the airplane. 
A weather study revealed that the airplane departed in visual meteorological conditions (VMC) 
and likely entered a combination of VMC and IMC after it climbed above 7,000 ft. Minutes 
later, the airplane encountered IMC and did not return to VMC for the remainder of the flight. 
The pilot's descent from 8,000 ft to 7,000 ft and then to 6,000 ft, occurred after the airplane 
entered IMC and indicates that he may have been attempting to return to VMC by descending, 
but was unsuccessful. Upon encountering IMC, the pilot could have turned around and 
returned to VMC, but he elected to continue and descend about 750 feet below the lowest peak 
terrain elevation in the area. The airplane's altitude increased rapidly by about 500 ft just 
seconds before the airplane impacted terrain suggesting that the pilot may have been alerted by 
the onboard terrain awareness warning system, which had been successfully tested by the co-
owner, or observed the terrain and maneuvered to avoid the impact. 
The non-instrument-rated pilot's improper decisions to begin and to continue a flight under 
visual flight rules into instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in controlled flight 
into terrain.
