The private pilot was conducting a cross-country personal flight. He reported that he entered 
the downwind pattern at his home airfield and prepared the airplane to land using the 
manufacturer's checklist, which included selecting the fullest fuel tank, setting flaps to 5°, and 
lowering the landing gear. While on an extended downwind leg, the pilot noticed that the 
airplane had descended to between 700 and 800 ft above ground level, so he added engine 
power to climb back to pattern altitude, but the engine stopped producing power. The pilot 
turned the airplane toward the runway, which he estimated was more than 1.5 miles away. He 
realized that he was not going to be able to glide the configured airplane to the runway, so he 
performed a forced landing to a field but landed short in a wooded area. 
Examination and testing of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation. Maintenance had recently been conducted on the fuel selector's union 
fitting. The mechanic who conducted the maintenance reported purging the lines of air and 
conducting a successful postmaintenance test flight before releasing the airplane to the pilot. 
The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
The loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination and testing of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation.
On January 4, 2017, about 1545 central standard time, a Mooney M20K airplane, N1159G, 
conducted a forced landing near Nacogdoches, Texas. The private rated pilot sustained minor 
injuries and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to and 
operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated 
without a flight plan. The flight departed the Kerrville Municipal Airport and was about to land 
at the A L Mangham Jr Regional Airport (OCH), Nacogdoches, Texas.
The airplane had recently undergone an annual inspection and the flight was the second flight 
since the inspection. The pilot reported that the preflight and flight was uneventful until he 
entered the pattern to land at OCH. The pilot prepared the airplane to land using the 
manufacturer's checklist, which included changing to the fullest fuel tank, which was the left 
fuel tank, setting flaps to 5° and lowering the landing gear. While on an extended downwind 
leg, the pilot noticed that his altitude dropped to 700 to 800 ft above ground level, so he added 
engine power to climb back to pattern altitude. The airplane's engine stopped producing power 
without any vibrations or sputtering. The pilot turned the airplane towards the runway and 
estimated the distance to be more than 1.5 miles from the end of the runway. He set up best 
glide but perceived that the airplane was descending too quickly to make the runway. The pilot 
performed a forced landing to a field but landed short in a wooded area.
The airplane was moved to a secure location and several engine runs were conducted. Testing 
included scenarios with the fuel lines not purged of air. Engine runs with the left fuel line not 
purged of air, the engine would stop producing power if the pilot did not intervene and either 
activate the boost pump or switch back to the right tank. Testing found that when purged of air, 
the engine operated normally. Examination of the airframe found no anomalies. Examination 
of the fuel selector found no anomalies and each switch position was easily discerned.
The mechanic, who has worked on Mooney airplanes for 48 years, provided a statement 
concerning the work performed on the airplane prior to the accident. During N1159G's annual 
inspection, a discrepancy found were numerous fuel stains throughout the belly panels. The 
source of the leak was determined to be the o-rings on fittings in the fuel selector valve. The 
mechanic was familiar with the fuel selector valve and suspected that the o-rings were 
deteriorated. To perform the required replacement, both fuel tanks were drained and the fuel 
selector valve was removed from the airplane. The fuel selector was not disassembled and the 
four unions were removed. The O-rings were replaced and the fittings were torqued. The 
selector valve was reinstalled and the fuel tanks were refilled with the fuel that had been 
previously removed and filtered. The fuel selector was moved from the off position to the left 
position and the fuel supply to the valve was purged of air thru the gascolator drain valve. The 
selector was then moved to the right position and the right fuel line to the selector was purged 
of air thru the gascolator drain valve. Inspection showed no leaks and after several days was re-
examined and found not leaking. The annual inspection and repairs were completed. The 
mechanic, who is also a pilot, performed a post maintenance flight that included selecting both 
the left and right tanks during the preflight, taxi, and flight portions. He did not detect any 
leaks during the post flight inspection.
The pilot has owned N1159G for almost 25 years and has at least 941 hours in the airplane 
without a similar incident occurring.
