The sport pilot reported that, about 15 minutes into the pleasure flight, the engine began 
"sputtering" and losing power. The pilot attempted to correct the problem by adjusting the 
throttle and applying the engine primer without success. The pilot then selected a field for a 
forced landing, during which the right main landing gear struck a power line. The airplane then 
flipped over and subsequently impacted a carport rooftop. 
Examination of the engine revealed that one of the four spark plugs was loose in the cylinder, 
which led to a loss of compression and partial loss of engine power. The pilot's safety 
recommendation stated, "closer inspection of checking spark plugs before flight."
The partial loss of engine power due to a loose spark plug. Contributing to the accident was the 
pilot's improper preflight inspection of the airplane.
On January 1, 2017, about 1130 central standard time, a Quicksilver GT-400 R503 
experimental light sport airplane, N415HC, impacted power lines during a forced landing 
following a partial loss of engine power near New Braunfels, Texas. The sport pilot, who was 
the sole occupant, was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual as a 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident and a flight plan was not filed. The local flight departed a private airstrip about 
1110.
According to the pilot/owner, about 15 minutes into the pleasure flight, the engine began 
"sputtering" and losing power. The pilot attempted to correct the problem by adjusting the 
throttle and applying engine primer. The attempts were unsuccessful in restoring engine 
power. The pilot then identified a field for a forced landing. During the forced landing, the right 
main landing gear struck a power line. After impacting the power line, the airplane flipped 
inverted, and dropped about 20 feet onto a carport rooftop. The pilot exited the airplane.
Examination of the airplane by Federal Aviation Administration inspectors revealed both 
wings were bent and the wing fabric was damaged. No visual anomalies with the engine were 
noted.
After the airplane was recovered from the carport, the pilot and a few friends examined the 
airplane and systems. The pilot noticed that one of the four engine spark plugs was loose in the 
cylinder. The pilot determined that the loose spark plug led to a loss of compression and partial 
loss of engine power during the accident flight. The pilot's safety recommendation, as noted in 
the pilot/operator accident report, stated "closer inspection of checking spark plugs before 
flight."
