The purpose of the flight was to take nighttime aerial photographs of several cruise ships in a 
nearby harbor. The helicopter with the commercial pilot and the passenger/photographer 
aboard departed from the operator's ramp area, and proceeded to the harbor where it made 
numerous orbits. Following the orbits, the helicopter flew toward a jetty, and witnesses on one 
ship reported that the helicopter started spinning as it went straight down into the water. The 
helicopter came to rest upright in about 18 ft of water. All major components of the helicopter 
were recovered except the outboard 3/4 of one main rotor blade. The fracture surface at the 
separation point was jagged and angular consistent with an overstress failure at impact. The 
intact main rotor blade exhibited coning, which was indicative of low rotor rpm at impact. 
There were no rotational signatures between the cooling fan and scroll or the upper sheave and 
the airframe, which indicated that the engine was not operating at impact. Examination of the 
helicopter revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have 
precluded normal operation.
The carburetor heat control knob in the cockpit was in the full down or "OFF" position and 
unlocked. The slider on the carburetor heat airbox was in a midrange position; the airbox was 
deformed, and the slider cable was displaced. At impact, if the airbox moves out of position, it 
will likely stretch the cable, which will move the slider valve. The helicopter was equipped with 
a carburetor heat assist device; lowering the collective mechanically added heat and raising the 
collective reduced heat. If the pilot was not manipulating the collective, the assist device would 
not have an effect. Carburetor heat would only be controlled by the pilot's manipulation of the 
carburetor heat control knob. If the control knob had been up in an "ON" position, it likely 
would have been bent and still up.
The airframe manufacturer has issued safety notices regarding carburetor ice and low rotor 
rpm blade stall. One safety notice stated that failure to maintain rotor rpm can result in low 
rotor rpm stall, and the helicopter can fall at an extreme rate. Another safety notice stated that 
main rotor blade stall due to low main rotor rpm caused a very high percentage of helicopter 
accidents. If the pilot had maintained main rotor rpm, he might have been able to make a 
Page 2 of 8WPR17FA047
successful autorotation and touch down less violently on the water, which might have allowed 
the occupants to egress the helicopter. However, performing an autorotation to water on a dark 
night would be a difficult maneuver.
The meteorological conditions at the time of the accident were conducive for the formation of 
carburetor ice, but the carburetor heat control knob was in the "OFF" position. It is likely that 
the pilot's failure to apply carburetor heat resulted in a loss of engine power due to carburetor 
ice. During the ensuing forced landing, the pilot did not maintain adequate main rotor rpm, 
and the helicopter descended rapidly to impact.
The pilot's failure to use carburetor heat while operating in conditions conducive to carburetor 
icing, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. Also causal was the 
pilot's failure to maintain rotor rpm following the loss of engine power.
