Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
JUNEAU, AK
Incident Number:
ANC00IA010
Date & Time:
11/02/1999, 0640 AST 
Registration:
N792AS
Aircraft:
Boeing 737-400
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
58 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The scheduled passenger flight was inbound for landing during the period of dawn.  A cargo 
airplane was also inbound, preceding the passenger flight.  The airport air traffic control tower 
(ATCT) was closed.  An automated flight service station (AFSS) was in operation.  AFSS 
personnel cannot see the runway. An airport maintenance crew was conducting snow removal 
training on the runway in a plow equipped truck.  The passenger flight crew contacted the 
AFSS at the VOR (25.2 miles away), and advised they were inbound for landing.  At that time, 
the plow was off the runway, waiting for the cargo airplane to arrive.  The crew of the passenger 
airplane was not advised of any airfield maintenance activity. After the cargo airplane landed, 
the plow driver informed the AFSS of his intentions, and drove onto the runway to continue 
training.  AFSS personnel advised the driver of the plow that the passenger airplane was about 
10 minutes behind the cargo airplane.  Without any further communication, the passenger 
flight touched down on the runway while the plow was driving along the right edge of the 
runway, facing away from the arriving jet.  The passenger jet swerved to the left during the roll 
out to miss the plow truck.  The right wing tip of the jet passed about 32 feet from the plow 
truck.  The verbal report of men and equipment on the runway, given by the plow driver to the 
AFSS is a local NOTAM only.  The local NOTAM was not transmitted to the arriving passenger 
flight.  When the ATCT is closed, there are no mandatory reporting points for arriving 
airplanes.  There are only recommended traffic advisories for position reporting of arriving 
traffic.  The recommended traffic advisories are contained in the company flight operations 
manual. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The failure of the flight crew to provide a recommended landing traffic advisory, and the failure 
of flight service station personnel to provide a flight advisory to the arriving airplane 
concerning men and equipment operating on the runway.  Factors in the incident were 
operations at an airport when the control tower was closed, and the failure of the snow plow 
driver to verify the eminent arrival of the airplane. 
Page 2 of 8ANC00IA010
Findings
Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. AIRPORT EQUIPMENT,SNOW REMOVAL - OTHER
2. (F) CONTROL TOWER - CLOSED
3. (C) TRAFFIC ADVISORY - NOT PERFORMED - FLIGHTCREW
4. (C) FLIGHT ADVISORIES - NOT ISSUED - ATC PERSONNEL(FSS)
5. (F) AIR/GROUND COMMUNICATIONS - NOT VERIFIED - DRIVER OF VEHICLE
Page 3 of 8ANC00IA010
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 2, 1999, about 0640 Alaska standard time, a Boeing 737-400 airplane, N792AS, 
nearly collided with a snow plow during landing on runway 08 at the Juneau International 
Airport, Juneau, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated by Alaska Airlines, Seattle, 
Washington, as Flight 73, an instrument flight rules (IFR) scheduled passenger flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 121, when the incident occurred.  The captain, the first officer, three cabin 
crew members, and the 53 passengers, were not injured.  Neither the airplane or the snow plow 
were damaged.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  An IFR flight plan was filed.  The 
flight originated at the Rocky Gutierrez Airport, Sitka, Alaska, about 0600.
After departing Sitka, Flight 73 proceeded toward Juneau.  The Juneau Air Traffic Control 
Tower (ATCT) was closed, and was not scheduled to open until 0700.  A Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS) was in operation at the time of 
the incident.  Juneau AFSS personnel cannot see the runway.  The driver of Plow 11, a Juneau 
Airport field maintenance dump truck equipped with a snow removal blade, was training a new 
driver on the airport.  The plow was moving eastbound along the right edge of runway 08, 
about 3,000 feet from the approach end of the runway.  According to the driver of Plow 11, the 
right edge of the plow blade was about 5 feet inside the runway edge stripe.
At 0629:10, a Beech 1900 cargo airplane, call sign ACE Air 41, contacted the Juneau AFSS on 
the common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) of 118.7 MHz, at BARLO intersection (the final 
approach fix on the instrument approach to runway 08, 9.2 nautical miles west of the Juneau 
airport), stating:  "Ace Air 41, BARLO, inbound for (runway) eight."  The AFSS specialist at the 
in-flight one position acknowledged the radio contact, and then asked the driver of Plow 11, 
who was also monitoring the CTAF, if he heard the radio call from ACE Air 41 reporting 
BARLO.  The driver acknowledged the call by stating:  "Ground, that's affirmative, 
maintenance, at this time men and equipment are clear of the runway, I'd like to get back out 
after he's down and clear."  The in-flight one AFSS specialist then advised Plow 11, "Airfield 
maintenance, roger, after ACE Air, about 10 minutes behind him is the other Alaska jet."  The 
driver of Plow 11 acknowledged the information.
At  0632:28, Alaska Flight 73 contacted the Juneau AFSS stating:  "Juneau radio, Alaska 73 is 
with you, just leaving SISTERS (VOR) for the LDA 2 (localizer type directional aid) to runway 
08."  The AFSS specialist at the in-flight one position acknowledged the radio call.  The 
SISTERS VOR is 16 miles from BARLO intersection, and 25.2 miles from runway 08.
At 0633:35, Ace Air 41 reported, "Juneau, Ace Air 41 down and clear, if you'd close us out 
please."  The AFSS specialist at the in-flight two position acknowledged the radio call.
At 0634:51, the driver of Plow 11 called the AFSS and stated:  "Juneau radio, airfield 
maintenance, if you have no reported traffic, like to have men and equipment on the runway."  
The AFSS specialist at the in-flight two position said "stand by" and at 0635:23 stated:  "and 
Juneau airfield maintenance, no known traffic at this time, the jet's due in, in about 10 minutes 
at 45 (minutes past the hour)."  The driver of Plow 11 acknowledged the radio call.
At 0642:25, Alaska Flight 73 called the Juneau AFSS and stated:  "ah we just landed and there 
was a truck on the runway, we ah just barely missed it...  ah it, we had to swerve very far to the 
left of the runway to miss the truck."  The AFSS specialist at the in-flight one position 
Page 4 of 8ANC00IA010
acknowledged the radio call, and replied, "Alaska 73 roger, sorry, I missed your last report, I 
didn't hear a BARLO area report, I thought it was ASORT, was the last one."  ASORT 
intersection is 21 miles from the SISTERS VOR.  It is usually a reporting point for airplanes 
arriving from the north, not from Sitka.
Alaska Flight 73 then stated:  "We don't think that's correct, but in any event, I think we called 
the report, but we just, the truck was on the runway."
The driver of Plow 11 then stated:  "radio, maintenance was just outside the lights, I never got a 
call, it's the grace of God that we're all right."
Following the incident, ground maintenance personnel from the Juneau Airport measured and 
diagrammed the scuff marks on the runway produced by Flight 73 swerving to avoid the snow 
plow.  Their measurements revealed that as the Alaska Airlines jet passed the plow truck, the 
airplane's right main landing gear was about 18 feet to the left of the runway center stripe.  The 
outboard end of the right wing was about 16 feet to the right the center stripe.  The left side of 
the plow truck's blade was about 27 feet to the left of the right runway edge stripe.  The 
distance from the right wing tip, to the plow truck, was about 32 feet.
Plow 11 was facing east, away from the approaching jet.  The truck is equipped with strobe 
lights on the back of the truck, and a rotating beacon on the top of the cab.  According to an 
FAA inspector with the Juneau Flight Standards District Office, the strobe and beacon lights 
were functional and operating at the time of the incident.
The incident occurred during the period of dawn.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
On November 2, 1999, at 0653, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) for the Juneau 
Airport was reporting in part:  Wind, calm; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky 
condition, 1,600 feet scattered, 2,800 feet scattered, 3,800 feet overcast; temperature, 35 
degrees F; dew point, 33 degrees F; altimeter, 29.69 inHg; remarks, variable broken ceiling, 
lower to the east, higher to the west.
COMMUNICATIONS
Ground and airborne communications at the Juneau airport are all conducted on the Juneau 
CTAF when the ATCT is closed.  The driver of Plow 11, and the crew of Flight 73, were utilizing 
the CTAF.
When the Juneau ATCT is closed, there are no mandatory reporting points for arriving aircraft 
to the Juneau airport.
When Flight 73 made their initial radio call at the SISTERS VOR, no men or equipment were 
on the Juneau runway.  No advisory of men and equipment on the runway was provided to 
Flight 73 by the Juneau AFSS.  After reporting SISTERS VOR, Flight 73 made no other radio 
calls.
A transcript of communications with the Juneau AFSS is included in this report.
AERODROME AND GROUND FACILITIES
The Juneau International airport is owned and operated by the City and Borough of Juneau.  
The airport has a hard-surface runway on a 080 to 260 degree magnetic orientation.  Runway 
08 is 8,456 feet long by 150 feet wide, and is equipped with sequenced lead-in lights to runway 
Page 5 of 8ANC00IA010
08, high intensity runway lights, runway end identifier lights, medium intensity approach 
lighting, and a visual approach slope indicator.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
AFSS specialists provide assistance in emergency situations, in-flight services, and preflight 
services to airman.  In-flight services are provided to aircraft in flight, or operating on an 
airport surface, and may include NAVAID monitoring, local airport advisories (LAA), delivery 
of air traffic control clearances, advisory services to pilots, notice to airman (NOTAM), search 
and rescue services, weather information, flight planning, and other services.
Under two letters of agreement between the Juneau Airport, and the Juneau AFSS, airport 
conditions which could affect the safe operation of the airport are provided to the AFSS by 
Juneau airport personnel via fax, radio, telephone, or in person.  Airport personnel will keep 
the AFSS informed of personnel authorized to issue NOTAM information.  Airport personnel 
will advise the AFSS before moving onto an airport movement area, and when vehicles are 
clear of movement areas.  They will ensure the work force supervisor has two-way radio 
communication with the AFSS on the CTAF, and will ensure the vehicular traffic does not 
conflict with aircraft arrivals, departures, or ground movements within the airport movement 
area.
When the Juneau ATCT is closed, the AFSS will monitor the CTAF.  Advise work personnel of 
known aircraft arrivals, departures, or ground movements, and will advise work personnel of 
any nonreported vehicles on the airport movement area.
Advisories to pilots about airfield conditions may be provided by AFSS personnel by radio, or 
NOTAM.  A radio report of men and equipment on the airport, provided by Juneau airport 
maintenance personnel to the AFSS, constitutes a local NOTAM.  
According to the FAA's Flight Services Handbook (FAA order 7110.10), a local airport advisory 
(LAA) is a terminal service provided by designated facilities located at airports without an 
operating control tower.  The elements and phraseology of an LAA, are stated in Paragraph 4-
4-2, include:  "7. Traffic - Factual information about observed or reported traffic which may 
constitute a collision hazard.  This may include positions of aircraft in flight or aircraft and 
vehicles operating on the airport; 9. NOTAM - NOTAM's concerning local NAVAID's and field 
conditions pertinent to flight."  Paragraph 4-4-4, Authorized LAA Frequency states, in part:  
"Provide LAA on 123.6 or 123.65 at non-tower locations and on the tower local control 
frequency at an airport with a part-time FAA tower when that facility is not operating.  
...Encourage the pilot to guard the LAA frequency or tower control frequency while 
approximately within a 10-mile radius of the airport."  The FAA Handbook does not require the 
LAA to be issued at the 10 mile point, nor is it an advisory that is only given upon request of the 
pilot.
Section 4 -1-9, "Traffic Advisory Practices at Airports Without Operating Control Towers" of 
the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM), contains recommended communication 
practices.  For in-bound aircraft, when a traffic control tower in not in operation, and a flight 
service station is open, the AIM recommends communication on the CTAF.  For inbound 
aircraft, communications should be provided when the airplane is 10 miles out, entering 
downwind, base, and final, and when leaving the runway.
The same recommended practices are contained in Section 3.100 of Alaska Airlines flight 
operations manual.
Page 6 of 8ANC00IA010
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Flight Engineer
Age:
49, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/21/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
14793 hours (Total, all aircraft), 857 hours (Total, this make and model), 5700 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 46 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Boeing
Registration:
N792AS
Model/Series:
737-400 737-400
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
28887
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
140
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/29/1999, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
143500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
96 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
8788 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Cfm
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
CFM-56-3C-1
Registered Owner:
FIRST SECURITY BANK
Rated Power:
22000 lbs
Operator:
ALASKA AIRLINES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121); 
Supplemental
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
ASAA
Page 7 of 8ANC00IA010
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PAJ, 19 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0653 AST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1600 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 3800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
SITKA, AK (PASI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (PAJN)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0600 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
JUNEAU INTERNATIONAL (PAJN)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
19 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
8
IFR Approach:
LDA
Runway Length/Width:
4900 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
53 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
58 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT        ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
05/17/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
JIM   HETTWER (FAA); JUNEAU, AK
TERRY   CLARK; SEATTLE, WA
STEVE   HUTCHISON; AUBURN, WA
ALLAN   HEESE, JUNEAU AIRPORT; JUNEAU, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8ANC00IA010
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
