National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOGANSVILLE, GA
Accident Number: ATL99LA038
Date & Time: 01/02/1999, 1618 EST
Registration: N5016T
Aircraft: Piper PA-34-200
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis About 30 miles from the destination airport, approach control informed the pilot of lowered cloud ceilings and thunderstorm activity over the airport.
At approximately the same time the pilot reported a low fuel condition and was vectored towards a second airport.
A missed approach was performed at the second airport, and the pilot was given vectors towards a third airport.
While descending for the third airport, the pilot reported that 'the left engine ran out of fuel' and the engine had quit.
The pilot attempted an emergency landing on a power line right- of-way.
According to the Piper Aircraft PA-34 Information Manual, N5016T has a usable fuel capacity of 93 U.S. gallons and seven gallons unusable.
The pilot reported that he departed with 100 gallons of fuel on board.
While operating the airplane at a gross weight of 4000 pounds and 65% power, fuel consumption is 18.3 gallons per hour for both engines, and maximum flight duration of 5.08 hours.
N5016T had flown 5.72 hours when the accident occurred.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Fuel exhaustion due to inadequate planning and the pilot's failure to refuel the airplane.
Factors were the weather conditions and hilly terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY 5.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 6.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING Factual Information On January 2, 1999, at 1618 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-34-200, N5016T, collided with the ground during an emergency landing near Hogansville, Georgia.
The airplane was operated by the registered owner/pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and instrument flight rules (IFR).
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the accident site and an IFR flight plan was filed for the personal flight.
The commercial pilot received minor injuries and the three passengers received no injuries.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight departed Manassas, Virginia, at 1035 the same day, destined for Columbus Metropolitan Airport, Columbus, Georgia.
According to the pilot, he received a full weather briefing from the Leesburg, Virginia, Flight Service Station at 0430 on the morning of the flight.
Additional weather information was obtained enroute via weather broadcasts over navigational radios, and from automated surface observations.
While approximately 30 miles from Columbus Metropolitan Airport (CSG), the pilot was informed of a lowered ceiling and thunderstorm over the destination airport.
He immediately notified Air Traffic Control (ATC) of his low fuel condition and was vectored to LaGrange Airport (LGC).
Once stabilized on the ILS approach for LGC, the pilot realized he was on the back course and a missed approach was executed.
The pilot was then given vectors towards Newnan-Coweta County Airport (CCO) which was reported "in the clear".
According to the pilot, an emergency was declared to Atlanta Approach Control several times but no response was received.
After starting a descent, the pilot reported that "the left engine ran out of fuel", and quit.
The pilot feathered the left propeller, and he increased power on the right engine.
Visual contact with the ground was made about 400 feet AGL.
During the emergency landing, the airplane collided with the top of a tall pine tree.
The airplane landed with the gear and flaps retracted on a hilly power line right-of-way.
According to the Piper Aircraft PA-34 Information Manual, N5016T has a usable fuel capacity of 93 U.S. gallons and seven gallons unusable.
The pilot reported that he departed with 100 gallons of fuel on board.
While operating the airplane at a gross weight of 4000 pounds and 65% power, fuel consumption is 18.3 gallons per hour for both engines, or maximum flight duration of 5.08 hours.
N5016T had flown 5.72 hours when the accident occurred.
The pilot did not flight plan or make a refueling stop for this flight.
No mechanical problems, with the airplane, were reported by the pilot.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
