Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Atlanta, GA
Accident Number:
CHI07LA035
Date & Time:
12/03/2006, 1114 EST 
Registration:
N46PT
Aircraft:
Piper PA 46-350P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he heard a loud whistling noise while in level cruise at flight level (FL) 
220 and noticed that the right side attitude indicator was "tilted."  While he was leaning over 
adjusting the instrument, he realized that the airplane was in a dive.  He leveled the wings and 
pulled out of the dive at FL 190.  The autopilot (A/P) was re-engaged and the flight was 
completed to its intended destination without further incident.  A visual examination after the 
descent revealed the left front baggage door open and buckled, and the left and right wings 
showed skin damage and wrinkling approximately 54 inches from the wing roots.  When 
tested, the autopilot and flight director performed within test specifications with only "minor" 
deviations.  Both vacuum pumps tested within test specifications.  The right side attitude 
indicator continued to show a three degree turn even after a kink in the vacuum supply to the 
right side attitude indicator was removed.  The "normal" static system leaked in excess of 
allowable limits; however, the valve was found to be in the "alternate" position before it was 
tested.  An active noise-canceling set of headphones was found connected to the pilot's side of 
the cockpit.  The A/P disconnect tone was found to be operating normally while the engine was 
at idle power.  During the test, it was noted that the tone was difficult to hear while wearing the 
headset.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The exceedance of airplane design stress limits when the pilot did not maintain aircraft control 
after his attention was diverted to the right side attitude indicator during cruise flight. An 
additional cause was the aural detection for the autopilot disconnect was difficult to hear with 
the noise canceling headset.   A contributing factor was the disengaged autopilot/flight 
director.
Page 2 of 6CHI07LA035
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) AUTOPILOT/FLIGHT DIRECTOR - DISENGAGED
2. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. FLIGHT/NAV INSTRUMENTS,ATTITUDE INDICATOR - FAILURE,PARTIAL
5. (C) VISUAL/AURAL DETECTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. VACUUM SYSTEM - OBSTRUCTED
----------
Occurrence #2: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. FUSELAGE - BENT
8. (C) DESIGN STRESS LIMITS OF AIRCRAFT - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND
9. WING - BENT
Page 3 of 6CHI07LA035
Factual Information
On December 3, 2006, about 1114 eastern standard time, a Piper PA 46-350P, N46PT, owned 
and piloted by a private pilot, arrived with substantial damage at Indianapolis Metropolitan 
Airport (UMP), Indianapolis, Indiana.  The pilot stated that the autopilot disengaged over 
Atlanta, Georgia, during cruise at flight level (FL) 220.  The airplane then entered a "dive" from 
which he recovered at FL 190.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating on an 
instrument rules flight plan.  The private pilot and passenger were uninjured.  The flight 
originated from Page Field Airport, Fort Myers, Florida, about 0823 and was en route to UMP.
The pilot stated that he heard a "loud whistling noise" and noticed that the right side attitude 
indicator horizon was "tilted".  He was leaning over the right front pilot seat while "focusing" 
and "adjusting" the right side attitude indicator horizon.  He "soon" noticed that the right side 
heading indicator was turning.  He sat up and "discovered" the airplane was in a "dive."  He 
leveled the wings and pulled out of the "dive" at FL 190.  The pilot then requested a climb back 
up to FL 200, and the flight was completed to UMP without further incident.  The pilot 
reported that he re-engaged the autopilot and it worked "fine" for the rest of the trip.
Upon a visual examination of the exterior of the airplane, the left forward baggage door was 
found open and buckled.  Both wings had wrinkles and skin deformation in the upper skin 
surface approximately 54 inches from the wing roots.  The damage to the left wing surface was 
more pronounced. 
Bench testing of the autopilot (A/P) computer and the flight director (FD) was conducted.  
Both units performed properly with only minor deviations.  The FD was slow to come on but 
did stabilize and performed correctly.  Both vacuum pumps were tested on the airplane, and 
operation was found to be normal with 5.1 psi of suction.  The right side attitude indicator 
showed a three degree turn.  The vacuum supply hose for the right side attitude indicator was 
found kinked at the upper outboard instrument panel support.  The kink was removed and the 
right side attitude indicator continued to show a three degree turn.  The pitot-static system was 
tested.  The static supply source valve was found in the "alternate" position when the attempt 
to test and verify the altimeter and A/P altitude hold mode was conducted.  The "alternate" 
static system tested within limits, however the "normal" static system leaked in excess of 
allowable limits.  The A/P altitude hold mode operation tested normal.  When simulated flight 
at FL 220 was conducted, the A/P made correct pitch trim inputs to the stabilizer when 25 foot 
altitude excursions above and below FL 220 were simulated.  An operational check of the A/P 
and instruments under aircraft power was normal. 
An active noise-canceling set of headphones was found connected to the pilot's side of the 
cockpit.  The A/P disconnect tone was found to be operating normally while the engine was at 
idle power.  During the test, it was noted that the tone was difficult to hear while wearing the 
headset.
Page 4 of 6CHI07LA035
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2006
Flight Time:
2700 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model), 2640 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 18 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N46PT
Model/Series:
PA 46-350P 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
4622108
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/01/2006, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1925 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540-A2A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI07LA035
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 19000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Ft. Meyers, FL (FMY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Indianapolis, IN (UMP)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0823 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Mitchell F Gallo
Adopted Date:
01/31/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Steve E Tatro; Federal Aviation Administration; Indianapolis, IN
George Hollingsworth; New Piper Aircraft, Inc.; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI07LA035
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
