National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bridgeport, CT
Accident Number: ERA09CA034
Date & Time: 11/01/2008, 1704 EDT
Registration: N4540L
Aircraft: GRUMMAN AMERICAN AVN. CORP.
AA-5B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Runway excursion
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The solo student pilot of the Grumman AA5B stated he was maneuvering in his local training area when he experienced symptoms of "vertigo."
The pilot was on a westerly heading in the late afternoon, looking through the propeller, at the onset of the symptoms.
He managed to navigate back to his home airport, but during the landing, lost directional control, departed the runway, and collided with an airport sign.
The pilot was not injured, but examination of his medical records revealed he was treated by a physician for symptoms of vertigo in the days following the accident.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3A), flicker vertigo is defined as: "A disorienting condition caused from flickering light off the blades of the propeller."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's loss of directional control during landing and while suffering symptoms of vertigo.
CORP.
Registration: N4540L Model/Series: AA-5B Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Normal Serial Number: AA5B1307 Landing Gear Type: Tricycle Seats: 4 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 04/30/2008, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
