While in normal cruise flight, the crew experienced lateral control problems.  An emergency 
was declared.  The aircraft landed safely at the intended destination.   Evidence of a water leak 
was identified by the cabin crew approximately 5 hours from the destination.  Efforts to control 
the leak were effective, however it was not completely stopped.  Water was reported coming 
from the upper deck and flowing through the main deck ceiling.  The flight was subsequently 
directed by air traffic control to make an enroute course change.  However, when this 
command was entered in the Flight Management Computer (FMC) the aircraft began a shallow 
left turn instead of a right turn as required.  Initial attempts to disconnect the autopilot were 
not successful and the autopilot was manually overridden.  The relief first officer at the controls 
stated the controls "felt unusual" and "stiff."  The captain reported elevator and rudder were 
normal, but bank angle was limited.  The landing was accomplished smoothly and safely 
according to the captain, and the aircraft was taxied to the gate without incident.  After 
landing, the captain noted the controls felt normal.  Ramp personnel reported a significant 
amount of water draining from the fuselage and the drain masts at the gate. A post-incident 
examination of the aircraft revealed that areas of the main deck carpeting was saturated.  The 
canted pressure deck overboard drains were not obstructed.  A 6-inch long by 0.125-inch wide 
gap was located along the outboard edge of the canted pressure bulkhead on the right side of 
the aircraft.  The seam was not sealed as required.  Immediately aft of the canted pressure 
bulkhead were aileron and flight spoiler control cables.  Four (4) circuit breakers common to 
the external drain line heaters were found open.  The external drain lines route wastewater 
from the cabin overboard.  The breakers were pulled in conjunction with routine cleaning of 
the drain lines prior to departure.  Ground functional testing of the aileron controls, the aileron 
trim and the autopilot did not find any anomalies.  A flight test was completed to verify in-
flight operation of the flight controls and potable water system.  No anomalies were noted.  
Airline procedures related to the routine inspection and cleaning of the external drains were 
reviewed.  Resetting of the drain heater circuit breakers was the last item.  A service bulletin 
had been issued which recommended testing, cleaning and inspection of the canted pressure 
deck drainage system (overboard drains), general visual inspection of the deck structure a 
pressurization test.  Service bulletin instructions included a visual inspection for loose, missing 
or cracked sealant.  The airline was in the process of incorporating the service bulletin into its 
Page 2 of 8CHI03IA097
maintenance program.  As a result, the initial service bulletin procedures had not been 
completed prior to the incident.  An airworthiness directive (AD) which required cleaning of 
"the cavity aft of the wing center section" and verification that all drains were open and clean 
was in effect at the time of the incident and had been complied with.  A new AD was issued 
following the incident which mandated full compliance with the existing service bulletin.
Failure of company maintenance personnel to fully comply with published 
maintenance/inspection procedures, as well as the resulting inoperative drain heaters and 
restricted movement of the aileron control cables.  Contributing factors were the impeded 
waste water drain system due to the inoperative heaters and the reduced aileron control due to 
restricted movement of the control cables.
On April 1, 2003, at 1115 central standard time, a Boeing 747-422, N175UA, operated by United 
Airlines as flight 896, reported lateral control problems while enroute from Hong Kong 
International Airport (HKG) to Chicago O'Hare International Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois.  
An emergency was declared approximately 175 miles northwest of ORD.  The flight landed at 
ORD without incident at 1146.  No injuries were reported by the 20 crew members and 299 
passengers.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the incident.  Flight 896 
was conducted on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan under 14 CFR Part 121.
According to the flight crew statements, when the aircraft was approximately 5 hours from its 
intended destination, the cabin crew notified the flight deck there was evidence of a water leak 
on the floor adjacent to the utility elevator.  The source of the leak was not readily apparent.
Approximately 3 hours later, 2 hours prior to landing, the cabin crew informed the flight deck 
that the leak had worsened and water was now dripping from the overhead bins on the main 
cabin level.  Maintenance control was contacted and advised the crew of the location of the 
shutoff valve.  It was located and closed.  The leak subsided at that time according to the cabin 
crew.
Approximately 1100 the flight was cleared direct to Janesville, Wisconsin (JVL).  The flight was 
reportedly located approximately 40 miles northwest of Minneapolis, Minnesota, at the time.  
This command was entered in the Flight Management Computer (FMC).  However, instead of a 
shallow right turn to proceed direct to JVL as expected, the aircraft began a shallow left turn.
Initial attempts to disconnect the autopilot were not successful and the autopilot was manually 
overridden.  The autopilot and flight director were recycled.  The autopilot was again engaged 
and the aircraft again started a shallow left turn.  The autopilot was once again manually 
overridden.
The relief first officer at the controls stated: "I made a right input in the controls to counter act 
the left turn.  At this time the flight controls felt unusual to me so I reported to the crew that we 
might have a flight control problem. I attempted a shallow turn to the left but the aircraft 
controls felt stiff."
At this point the captain and flying first officer took control of the aircraft.  The captain 
reported: "Elevator and rudder were normal, but bank angle was limited to approximately 3-5 
degrees left and about 7 degrees right."
The captain went on to state that they decided to declare an emergency and since the aircraft 
was positioned near the extended centerline for ORD runway 14R, they decided to land on 14R.  
The captain noted: "We were in a position that would allow us to intercept 14R with only a 20-
30 degree right turn and that we would be able to fly a long final with minimum maneuvering."  
The landing was accomplished smoothly and safely according to the captain, and the aircraft 
was taxied to the gate without incident.
After landing, the captain reportedly performed a control check and noted the controls felt 
normal.  Ramp personnel reported a significant amount of water draining from the fuselage 
and the drain masts at the gate.
A post-incident examination of the aircraft was conducted. The main deck carpeting between 
doors 2 and 3 was saturated.  The cart lift shaft had water along the base on the main deck.  
The canted pressure deck drainage system was inspected in accordance with Boeing Service 
Bulletin 747-51A2057.  The overboard drains were not obstructed.
A 6-inch long by 0.125-inch wide gap was located along the outboard edge of the canted 
pressure bulkhead on the right side of the aircraft.  The seam was not sealed as required. 
Immediately aft of the canted pressure bulkhead were aileron and flight spoiler control cables.
Four (4) circuit breakers common to the external drain line heaters were found open.  The 
external drain lines route wastewater from the cabin overboard. According to United, the 
breakers were pulled in conjunction with routine cleaning of the drain lines in HKG prior to 
departure.  This was normally accomplished every 500 flight hours, according to the airline.
United engineering and maintenance personnel performed further post-incident testing.  The 
potable water tanks were filled and the system was checked.  No leaks were found.  The 
external drain masts were plugged and the system was observed.  Water subsequently backed 
up through the upper deck galley refrigeration air chiller unit and flowed into the main cabin 
through the ceiling panels on the right side of the aircraft.  The water subsequently drained 
into the canted pressure bulkhead below the main cabin floor, immediately forward of the aft 
wing spar.
Ground functional testing of the aileron controls, the aileron trim and the autopilot did not 
find any anomalies.  A 3-hour flight test was completed to verify in-flight operation of the flight 
controls and potable water system.  No anomalies were noted.
The United Airlines Instruction Sheet and the Boeing Maintenance Manual procedures related 
to the routine inspection and cleaning of the external drains were reviewed.  Both specified 
resetting of the drain heater circuit breakers as the last item in each procedure.
Boeing Service Bulletin 747-51A2057, issued February 21, 2002, recommended testing, 
cleaning and inspection of the canted pressure deck drainage system (overboard drains) within 
18 months of the date of the bulletin and every 18 months thereafter.  A general visual 
inspection of the deck structure was recommended within, and thereafter, every 36 months 
and a pressurization test of the canted pressure deck within, and thereafter, every 72 months.  
Service Bulletin instructions included a visual inspection for loose, missing or cracked sealant 
with the 36-month requirements.
According to company engineering personnel, United was in the process of incorporating the 
service bulletin into its maintenance program.  As a result, the initial service bulletin 
procedures had not been completed prior to the incident.
At the time of the incident, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Airworthiness Directive 
(AD) 89-12-07 (Amendment 39-6232) was in effect.  This AD required cleaning of "the cavity 
aft of the wing center section" and verification that all overboard drains were open and clean.  
According to the airline, the AD was complied with during the most recent C-check 
maintenance inspection on December 18, 2002.  In addition, a review of the airline 
maintenance job instruction cards for this task revealed that no discrepancies were noted at the 
time by maintenance personnel.
On May 29, 2003 the FAA issued AD 2003-11-01 (amendment 39-13160), with an effective 
date of July 3, 2003, which mandated full compliance with the Boeing Service Bulletin.  This 
new AD also included the cleaning and verification requirements of AD 89-12-07.
