According to the pilot, prior to takeoff, he noted the wind sock was 70 to 90 degrees different to 
the wind he physically felt on the ground.  He departed runway 30, and while in flight he 
observed smoke near the airport which indicated a crosswind of approximately 135 degrees to 
the runway, which he thought appeared to be the same as on take off.  The pilot said when he 
landed on runway 30, the wind shifted and the tail of the airplane was picked up by the 
"tail/cross wind."  The airplane then veered left and started to depart the runway. Unable to 
correct with rudder or brakes, the pilot applied full power to abort the landing.  After lift off, to 
avoid trees, the pilot banked right which, "...caused the right wing to stall and slide into the 
ground by the wind sock."  The pilot did not report any pre-impact mechanical difficulties with 
the airplane. Winds at the airport were reported to be from 110 degrees at 7 knots about 20 
minutes after the accident, and as calm 45 minutes before the accident.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for the winds, and his failure to maintain airspeed which 
resulted in the inadvertent stall.  A factor in the accident was the tailwind.
On April 2, 2003, at 1435 eastern standard time, a Piper J3C-65, N88387, was substantially 
damaged during an aborted landing at the Taunton Municipal Airport (TAN), Taunton, 
Massachusetts.  The certificated private pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local personal flight conducted under 14 
CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, prior to departing TAN, he noted the wind sock was 70 to 90 degrees 
different to the wind he physically felt on the ground.  He departed runway 30, and while in 
flight, he observed smoke near the airport which indicated a crosswind of approximately 135 
degrees to the runway.  He said this, "Appeared to be the same as on take off."  The pilot said 
when he landed on runway 30, the wind shifted and the tail of the airplane was picked up by 
the "tail/cross wind."  The airplane then veered left and started to depart the runway. Unable 
to correct with rudder or brakes, the pilot applied full power to abort the landing.  After lift off, 
to avoid trees, the pilot banked right.
The pilot further stated, "..I had to bank right behind the wind sock, the combination of the tail 
wind and bank caused the right wing to stall and slide into the ground by the wind sock."  The 
pilot did not report any pre-impact mechanical difficulties with the airplane. 
According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, examination of the airplane revealed 
the right wing spar was broken at the fuselage. 
Winds at TAN were reported to be from 110 degrees at 7 knots about 20 minutes after the 
accident, and as calm 45 minutes before the accident.
