National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bismarck, ND
Accident Number: CHI05LA109
Date & Time: 05/03/2005, 2100 CDT
Registration: N2338V
Aircraft: Piper PA-31T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The airplane was substantially damaged during an emergency landing when the landing gear did not extend properly.
The pilot noted that when he attempted to lower the landing gear on approach to the intended destination nothing happened.
He elected to divert to an airport with additional capabilities and assistance available.
The pilot stated that he executed the emergency gear extension procedure, however, this procedure was not successful.
The left main landing gear appeared to be fully extended, the nose landing gear was in a "dragging" condition, and the right main landing gear was retracted when observed by the tower controller prior to landing.
The pilot noted that the red gear unlocked indicator light was illuminated and the green landing gear down/locked indicators were not illuminated.
Since no further options were available to extend the gear, the pilot executed an emergency landing.
The airplane touched down on the left main wheel which did not collapse initially.
The right wing subsequently dropped and contacted the runway.
The pilot applied left wheel brakes, however, the airplane departed the right side of the runway pavement and came to rest in the grass.
The left main landing gear collapsed and a runway light was damaged in the process.
The post- accident inspection revealed that a hydraulic powerpak drain line (Piper part number 46138- 00) was ruptured.
The drain line was located in the nose section of the airplane, forward of the cabin pressure bulkhead.
The rupture was approximately one-half inch long.
Hydraulic fluid was observed in the vicinity of the line rupture.
The hydraulic reservoir was empty.
A contributing factor was the runway light struck during the emergency landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM,LINE - RUPTURED 2.
(C) FLUID,HYDRAULIC - LOSS,PARTIAL ---------- Occurrence #2: WHEELS UP LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(C) GEAR EXTENSION - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
REMEDIAL ACTION - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 5.
(F) OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT ---------- Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 6.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On May 3, 2005, about 2100 central daylight time, a Piper PA-31T, N2338V, piloted by a private pilot, was substantially damaged during an emergency landing on runway 21 (6,600 feet by 100 feet, asphalt) at Bismarck Municipal Airport (BIS), Bismarck, North Dakota.
The flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.
The flight departed Jeffco Airport (BJC), Denver, Colorado, at 1630 with an intended destination of Bowman Municipal Airport (BPP), Bowman, North Dakota.
In his written statement, the pilot noted that when he attempted to lower the landing gear on approach to BPP nothing happened.
He elected to divert to BIS due to additional capabilities and assistance available there.
The pilot stated that he executed the emergency gear extension procedure outlined in the pilot's operating handbook.
However, this procedure was not successful.
He reported that the nose landing gear was in a "dragging/trailing" position when observed through the engine cowling site mirror.
He noted that the red gear unlocked indicator light was illuminated and the green landing gear down/locked indicators were not illuminated.
The pilot noted that the BIS tower controller informed him that the left main landing gear appeared to be fully extended, the nose landing gear was in a "dragging" condition, and the right main landing gear was retracted.
Since no further options were available to extend the gear, the pilot prepared for and executed an emergency landing.
He noted that the airplane touched down on the left main wheel which did not collapse initially.
The right wing subsequently dropped and contacted the runway.
The pilot reported that he applied the left wheel brakes, however, the airplane departed the right side of the runway pavement and came to rest in the grass.
The left main landing gear collapsed and a runway light was damaged in the process.
The post-accident inspection revealed that a hydraulic powerpak drain line (Piper part number 46138-00) was ruptured.
The drain line was located in the nose section of the airplane, forward of the cabin pressure bulkhead.
The rupture was approximately one-half inch long.
Hydraulic fluid was observed in the vicinity of the line rupture.
The hydraulic reservoir was empty.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
