National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fenton, LA
Accident Number: DFW05LA116
Date & Time: 05/01/2005, 0730 CDT
Registration: N63E
Aircraft: Grumman-Schweizer G-164B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The 2,800-hour pilot was performing an aerial application on a rice field when the airplane's turbine engine lost power.
The airplane landed short of a road, struck a drainage canal, bounced and came to rest in a rice field.
Examination of the engine revealed that the firewall fuel filter was blocked by an unknown foreign contaminant.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of blockage of the firewall fuel filter with an unknown contaminant.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,FILTER - BLOCKED(PARTIAL) 2.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION/EXHAUSTION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On May 1, 2005, approximately 0730 central daylight time, a tail-wheel equipped Grumman- Schweizer G-164B agricultural turbine powered single-engine airplane, N63E, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a reported loss of engine power during an aerial application flight near Fenton, Louisiana.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Kinder Ag Service, Inc., of Natchitoches, Louisiana.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight.
The local flight originated from a private airstrip near Kinder, Louisiana, at an unknown time.
In a written statement to the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the 2,800-hour pilot reported that he had just finished a turn to reverse direction and was in the process of positioning the airplane for the next pass when "the engine lost power."
The pilot added that he attempted to land on an adjacent field road; however, the airplane landed short of the road, struck a drainage canal, bounced, and came to rest in an upright position in a rice field.
There was no fire.
The pilot added that as the airplane came to a stop, the engine was still running.
After shutting the engine down, the pilot evacuated the airplane.
Examination of the airplane by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed that the left and right main landing gear were folded outboard, and the main support beam for the landing gear was cracked.
Fuel was observed in the left wing fuel tank.
Examination of the Walter M601 turbine engine by a representative from Walter America Inc., of West Helena, Arkansas, revealed that the firewall fuel filter was blocked by an unknown foreign contaminant.
Remaining fuel drained from the fuel control unit and the engine fuel pump was found to be consistent with diesel fuel.
A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) was not received from the pilot or the operator.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
