During touchdown following a practice ILS approach, the nose gear collapsed, resulting in 
structural damage to the airplane. Examination of the nose gear assembly revealed that the 
nose gear drag link bolt failed. The bolt was installed on the airplane approximately 441 flight 
hours prior to the accident, and Piper Service Bulletin (SB) 1156 requires operators to replace 
the bolt at 500-hour intervals due to a history of fatigue failures. Examination of the failed bolt 
revealed that it met design specifications for hardness, surface roughness, and microstructure. 
Further examination indicated that the bolt failed from reversed bending fatigue. The failure 
mode was atypical of the failure mode that prompted issuance of the SB.
The failure of the nose gear drag link bolt due to reversed bending fatigue.
On November 1, 2008, about 1630 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-44-180, N2214N, was 
substantially damaged when the nose landing gear collapsed during landing at the Gwinnett 
County Airport (LZU), Lawrenceville, Georgia. The instructional flight was conducted under 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed. The certificated flight instructor and commercial-rated student were not 
injured. The flight originated from LZU at 1530.
The student was performing a practice ILS approach as part of his multi-engine training 
program. After confirming "gear down, three green, nose gear in mirror," a normal touchdown 
was performed with no apparent side drift. As the nose was lowered to the runway, the nose 
gear collapsed. The airplane came to a stop on the runway and the pilots exited the airplane 
normally. 
An inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration inspected the aircraft and reported that 
the nose gear drag link bolt, Piper part number 402 940, failed. According to the airplane 
maintenance logbook, the bolt was installed on June 9, 2007. At the time of the accident, the 
airplane had accrued approximately 441 hours since the bolt was installed. According to the 
maintenance records, two new bearings associated with the bolt were also installed.
Piper Service Bulletin (SB) number 1156, dated April 7, 2005, applies to this airplane. The SB 
provides instructions for replacing the nose gear drag link bolt at 500-hour intervals. SB 1156 
states that, ﬁBy design, the bolt is free to rotate inside a set of bushings to allow relative 
movement between the Upper and Lower Drag Links during Landing Gear extension and 
retraction. Over an extended number of operating hours, this rotation can generate the score 
marks described, causing stress concentrations to develop in the bolt. Left uncorrected, this 
condition could eventually result in bolt failure, with subsequent nose gear collapse.ﬂ
According to a representative from Piper, SB 1156 has not been incorporated into the PA-44-
180 Aircraft Maintenance Manual (AMM) for this serial-numbered airplane. The SB has been 
incorporated for serial numbers 4496001 and higher. Piper expects the SB to be incorporated 
into the AMM for the older aircraft in early 2010.
Following the accident, the failed bolt was forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for 
examination. Examination of the accident bolt, using two exemplar bolts provided by Piper for 
comparison purposes, revealed that the accident bolt met design specifications for hardness, 
surface roughness, and microstructure.
Further examination of the accident bolt revealed that the bolt failed due to reversed bending 
fatigue. This is evidenced by diametrically opposed fatigue cracks that terminate at an area of 
overload fracture towards the middle of the bolts cross-section. The central overload fracture 
region roughly corresponds to the neutral axis of the reversed bending force on the bolt. The 
bolt failed due to the merging of numerous fatigue cracks from many fatigue initiation points 
around the periphery of the bolt shank.
The 1652 weather observation for LZU included the following: scattered clouds at 1,900 feet, 
winds calm, visibility 10 statute miles, temperature 19 degrees Celsius, dew point 2 degrees 
Celsius, and altimeter setting of 30.46 inches of mercury.
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse (Defining event)
