National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SALINA, KS
Accident Number: CHI96LA046
Date & Time: 12/02/1995, 1505 CST
Registration: N50235
Aircraft: ROBERT ECKLEY ROTORWAY
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was to check the cyclic rigging on the helicopter.
This was to be the helicopter's first flight in three years since it was recently taken out of storage.
After start up, the helicopter rolled over.
The pilot stated that the cause of the accident was the over adjusting of the cycle control during the rigging procedure.
The pilot has performed all inspections and rigging on the helicopter.
Review of the pilot's logbook revealed that the pilot did not hold a valid medical, airman certificate, nor the student pilot endorsements required to operate the helicopter.
The pilot also did not possess a Repairman Certificate.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper maintenance of the helicopter.
Factors in the accident were the pilot's lack of proper certification for the operation of the helicopter and his lack of recent experience in type of aircraft.
Findings Occurrence #1: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: STANDING - IDLING ROTORS Findings 1.
(C) MAINTENANCE,SERVICE OF AIRCRAFT/EQUIPMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LACK OF CERTIFICATION - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 2, 1995, at 1505 central standard time, an Eckley Rotorway helicopter, N50235, piloted by the owner/builder, sustained substantial damage when it rolled over after start up at Salina Municipal Airport, Salina, Kansas.
The non- certificated pilot reported no injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 14 CFR Part 91 local flight, no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone interview, the pilot reported that the helicopter had been in storage for the past three years.
This was to be the helicopter's first flight since taken out of storage.
The pilot stated the purpose of the flight was to check the cyclic rigging.
He stated that he has performed all inspections and rigging on the helicopter.
The pilot stated that the cause of the accident was the over adjusting of the cycle control during the rigging procedure which caused the rollover.
Review of the pilot's logbook revealed the pilot did not hold a valid medical, airman certificate, nor the student pilot endorsements required to operate the helicopter.
The pilot had no recent flying experience during the past three years.
The pilot also did not possess a Repairman Certificate.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
