National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ALEXANDER CITY, AL
Accident Number: ATL96LA016
Date & Time: 12/01/1995, 1130 CST
Registration: N53870
Aircraft: Bellanca 8KCAB
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that, while at 4,500 feet msl, the aircraft engine began to run rough, and then lost power.
The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing on a roadway, but the aircraft hit trees during the approach, then it impacted the terrain next to the roadway.
Examination of the engine revealed that the fuel injector diaphragm and 'O' ring were leaking.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The leaking fuel injector, which created a rich mixture, and caused the aircraft engine to lose power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,INJECTOR - LEAK ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
The airline transport pilot received minor injuries in the accident.
The aircraft was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions existed at the time, and a visual flight rules flight plan was in effect for the flight.
The flight departed Columbus, Georgia, at 1045.
The pilot stated that while at cruise flight at 4,500 feet above mean sea level, the aircraft engine began to run roughly, and then stopped producing power.
The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing on a roadway, but impacted trees, and the terrain during the approach.
Examination of the aircraft engine revealed that the "O" ring and diaphragm in the fuel injector servo were leaking.
The leaking servo resulted in a rich fuel/air mixtureand subsequent loss of engine power.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
