While in cruise flight, the airplane lost electrical power. The pilot went through emergency 
procedures to conserve electrical power, and returned to the airport. He attempted to extend 
the electrically operated landing gear, but only heard the right main gear come down and lock. 
There was no emergency gear extension system available on the airplane. Air traffic controllers 
in the airport tower later confirmed that the gear did not appear to be in the normal down and 
locked position. The pilot landed on runway 30, the nose and left main gear collapsed, and the 
right main gear snapped off. The airplane went off the left side of the runway onto the grass, 
shearing off an intersection marker and causing substantial damage to the wing spar. 
Postaccident examination revealed that the battery had a dead cell, and the alternator had 
several discrepancies.
The malfunction of the airplane's battery and alternator that resulted in the failure of the 
landing gear to extend and lock in place.
**This report was modified on 10/28/2014. Please see the public docket for this accident to 
view the original report.**
On April 2, 2008, about 1423 Pacific daylight time, an experimental Bennett Lancair 320, 
N456, landed with the nose gear and left main landing gear retracted at Portland-Hillsboro 
Airport, Portland, Oregon. The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The certificated private pilot and one passenger 
were not injured; the airplane sustained damage to the wing spar that was determined not to 
be substantial. The local personal instructional flight departed Hillsboro at 1300. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated that while in cruise flight, the airplane lost electrical power. The pilot 
immediately turned off the radios and intercom in order to try to save electrical power. He also 
went through emergency procedures for a loss of electrical power. The pilot flew back to the 
Hillsboro airport through Columbia Gorge in case he had to make an emergency landing. 
The pilot attempted to bring the gear down, but only heard the right main gear go down and 
lock. The left main gear and the nose gear did not seem to go down. The pilot stated that he 
went through the emergency checklist, but there is no emergency gear extension system 
installed on the airplane. He returned to the Hillsboro area, and received a green light-gun 
signal to land from the local tower. While landing, the landing gear collapsed about 500 or 600 
feet down runway 30. The airplane skidded and the right main gear snapped off. The airplane 
went off the left side of the runway onto the grass, shearing off an intersection marker.
The pilot reported that after the occurrence, tower personnel told him that when he had flown 
by, the gear "did not look good." Several times during the flight the pilot checked and did not 
see any blown fuses. He had pulled a fuse himself and then reset it in order to "relieve pressure 
from the system."
After the occurrence, the pilot tested the battery and found that it had a dead cell. He also 
found discrepancies with the alternator. He found no anomalies within the wiring or fuses.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
