National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Blaine, WA
Accident Number: WPR09TA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2008, 1840 PDT
Registration: N172AE
Aircraft: EUROCOPTER AS350B3
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Hard landing
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Public Aircraft
 Analysis During an annual helicopter proficiency evaluation flight, the flight instructor told the commercial pilot to conduct manual governor operations and the flight instructor then positioned the governor switch from "auto"  to "man" while on the downwind leg to the runway.
After performing a left 360-degree turn, the commercial pilot initiated a normal approach to the runway with the intention of performing a run-on landing.
The flight instructor reported that he heard the aural low rotor RPM horn sound and noticed the rotor RPM was slowing through 350 rpm as the helicopter was descending through about 20 feet agl.
The instructor stated that before he could react to correct the situation the helicopter struck the ground.
Examination of the helicopter by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the tail boom was partially bent and one of the main rotor blades was damaged.
No preimpact mechanical anomalies with the helicopter were reported by either pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain main rotor rpm, which resulted in a hard landing.
Contributing to the accident were the flight instructor's delayed remedial action and inadequate supervision of the flight.
The helicopter was registered to the US Department of Homeland Security and operated by the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) as a Public Use flight.
The commercial pilot and flight instructor were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local training flight.
The flight originated from Bellingham, Washington at 1815.
In written statements provided by the CBP, the pilot and flight instructor reported that they were conducting a series of practice emergency procedures during an annual proficiency evaluation flight.
After the completion of two landings, the instructor announced that they were going to conduct manual governor operations and positioned the governor switch from "auto" to "man" while on the downwind leg to runway 32.
After performing a left 360-degree turn, the pilot initiated an approach to the runway with the intention of performing a slide-on landing.
While on final approach to the runway, the pilot stated he felt like he was slightly high and increased the rate of descent "to intercept a flatter approach profile."
At an altitude of about 80 feet above ground level (agl), the pilot increased throttle and slightly raised the collective to maintain a "flatter approach profile."
Shortly after, he noticed the rotor rpm (NR) starting to slowly decay below the green arc and applied throttle.
While NR continued to decay, the low rotor RPM warning horn sounded as NR approached 360 rpm.
The pilot continued to increase throttle as NR stabilized at 350 rpm at an altitude of about 40 feet agl.
The pilot stated that as the helicopter descended through 20 feet agl, he attempted to increase throttle and collective to arrest the rate of descent when it "felt like the bottom fell out" and the helicopter landed hard on the asphalt runway surface in a slight nose high attitude.
The flight instructor reported that he heard the aural low rotor RPM horn sound and noticed the rotor RPM was slowing through 350 rpm as the helicopter was descending through about 20 feet agl.
The instructor stated that he positioned his left hand over the left collective twist grip, however, "before I could react to correct the situation," the helicopter struck the ground.
The instructor added that he "believes he saw throttle twisting in the decreasing RPM direction" prior to him placing his hand on the twist grip.
Examination of the helicopter by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed that the tail boom was partially bent and one of the main rotor blades was damaged.
No mechanical anomalies with the helicopter were reported by the commercial pilot or flight instructor.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
