National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Anchorage, AK
Accident Number: ANC09LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/2008, 1153 AKD
Registration: N788
Aircraft: PIPER PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Nose over/nose down
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use
 Analysis The commercial-certificated pilot, seated in the rear seat of a tundra-tire-equipped airplane, was landing on a gravel bar.
During the landing roll, the pilot applied excessive braking and the airplane nosed over.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's excessive application of the brakes during the landing roll, which resulted in the airplane nosing over.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the U.S. Department of Interior, Anchorage, Alaska.
The commercial certificated pilot, seated in the rear seat, and the airline transport pilot seated in the front seat, both certificated flight instructors, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Lake Hood Airstrip, Anchorage, Alaska, about 1300.
During an interview with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in- charge (IIC), on October 6, 2008, an investigator with the Department of Interior reported that the airplane was being operated for pilot proficiency, and to scout landing areas for an off- airport landing clinic.
Each of the two pilots aboard planned to fly from the rear seat of the airplane during the clinic, and the rear seat pilot had been designated as the pilot-in-command for the accident flight.
The rear seat pilot selected a gravel bar along the Susitna River that was about 2,000 feet long.
During the landing roll, he applied excessive braking, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane received structural damage to the right wing lift strut and the left wing.
: 2000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 36 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 8853 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320-B2B Registered Owner: U.S. Dept.
of Interior Rated Power: 160 hp Operator: U.S. Dept.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
