National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Crookston, MN
Accident Number: CEN09CA008
Date & Time: 10/01/2008, 1520 CDT
Registration: N251ND
Aircraft: PIPER PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot stated that he was established on final approach for runway 31 (4,300 feet by 75 feet, dry asphalt) and "everything was on track."
When the airplane crossed the threshold, he reduced engine power and began the landing flare.
After touchdown, the student pilot applied the brakes, which resulted in a skid and he was unable to maintain control.
The airplane subsequently departed the runway pavement and came to rest in a ditch.
The left main landing gear collapsed.
The student pilot was performing his first landing on his initial solo flight at the time of the accident.
He noted that the skies were clear and the winds were calm.
The pilot reported that he had accumulated 13 hours total flight time, with 9 hours in the same make and model airplane.
A post accident inspection did not reveal any anomalies associated with a pre impact failure or malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing.
A contributing factor was the student pilot's limited flight experience.
Additional factors were the presence of the ditch adjacent to the runway and the resulting collapse of the left main landing gear.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
