Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Oxford, CT
Accident Number:
NYC01LA198
Date & Time:
08/01/2001, 1130 EDT 
Registration:
N44EU
Aircraft:
Moran Europa Monowheel
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane touched down about 6 feet left of centerline, then bounced.  The pilot added 
power to abort the landing.  The airplane veered to the left, then touched down in the grass.  
The airplane continued to the left, the monowheel collapsed, the airframe buckled, and the 
airplane came to rest 200 feet left of the runway.  Winds, 25 minutes after the accident, were 
40 degrees from the right, at 6 knots.  There was no evidence of flight control malfunction.  The 
pilot subsequently stated that he did not get full engine power when he aborted the landing, 
and felt the problem resulted from throttle cable kinking due to rapid movement of the 
throttle.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during an aborted landing.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED
Findings
1. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 5NYC01LA198
Factual Information
On August 1, 2001, at 1130 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt Europa Monowheel, N44EU, was 
substantially damaged when it veered off a runway during an aborted landing at Waterbury-
Oxford Airport (OXC), Oxford, Connecticut.  The certificated private pilot received minor 
injuries, and visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight 
plan was on file for the local flight, which originated at Oxford.  The personal flight was 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he and his wife towed the airplane to the airport on its trailer, attached 
the wings, unloaded it, and attached the tailplanes.  The preflight inspection was normal and 
fuel samples were "clean."
The pilot started the engine, taxied to runway 36, completed an engine runup, and made a 
normal departure.  The pilot then flew the traffic pattern, and during an approach to a practice 
landing on runway 36, noted a "very slight" crosswind from the right.
The pilot continued a "normal" approach, and the airplane touched down 5 to 6 feet left of 
centerline.  "The landing had a moderate bounce, so I added slight throttle to cushion the 
expected second touchdown (the engine responded normally to this), judged how large the 
bounce was, and decided to add full power to go around instead of allowing it to bounce again."
The pilot rapidly moved the throttle forward, to the full power position, added right rudder and 
lowered the nose of the airplane to a near-level attitude.  He noted that the right rudder 
resulted in a "very slight right turn."  The pilot felt, in hindsight, that the engine was not 
producing full power, since he was "familiar with the amount of rudder needed to maintain 
straight ahead when full power is applied," as well as "the sort of howling sound from induction 
air that it makes at full power."
The pilot noted that the airplane leveled, but did not accelerate as it usually did when full 
power was applied.  "The Europa normally flies straight ahead instantly from a bounce when 
full power is applied."  The airplane turned slowly to the left but still did not gain altitude or 
accelerate. 
The pilot remembered seeing a parking lot ahead, so he knew the airplane was still level or 
"slightly up."  Then, either the mainwheel or the left outrigger contacted the ground, the 
airplane began to slide, and it veered further to the left before coming to a stop.  The pilot then 
shut off the engine, which was still operating at low power.
The pilot also noted that the airplane was fitted with electronic engine monitor with an 
optional fuel pressure sensor.  There were no annunciator alarms during the flight, so the pilot 
felt that all engine readings had been normal.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot reported that when 
the airplane touched down approximately 6 feet to the left of centerline it bounced.  The pilot 
added a small amount of power to cushion the next touchdown, but as he did so, the airplane 
began to veer to the left.  The pilot corrected with right rudder and coordinated stick inputs, 
and leveled the airplane's nose.  The pilot then decided that he did not like what he saw, and 
initiated a go-around.  He opened the throttle fully; however, the airplane continued to veer to 
the left, and touched down in the grass to the left of the runway.  
The airplane came to rest about 1,700 feet from the approach end of the runway and 200 feet 
Page 3 of 5NYC01LA198
to left of it.  All three composite propeller blades were broken off at the hub.  The airframe was 
buckled at the instrument console, and the monowheel was collapsed aft.  The rudder was 
functional but the ailerons could not be checked due to the position of the airplane on the 
ground.  Once the wings were removed, the ailerons moved freely.
Subsequent to submitting his original accident statement, the pilot felt that he may have had a 
problem with the throttle block in that he advanced the throttle so quickly that it caused the 
throttle cables to go slack and kink within the block.  The kink then locked the throttle at a low 
power setting.   The FAA inspector had the pilot operate the throttle lever through part of its 
range (the throttle slot was distorted during the accident and prevented full range) and the 
throttles were actuated.  The throttle block itself was inaccessible following the accident, so the 
pilot could not verify conclusively that kinking occurred.
The Europa kit was manufactured in England.  The United Kingdom Air Accidents 
Investigation Branch (AAIB) was contacted, and the throttle kinking information forwarded for 
further investigation.  Inquiries should be made to:
AAIB
Berkshire Copse Road
Aldershot
Hampshire
GU11 2HH
http://www.aaib.dtlr.gov.uk
Winds, reported at the airport 25 minutes after the accident, were from 040 degrees true, at 6 
knots.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/23/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/11/2000
Flight Time:
190 hours (Total, all aircraft), 46 hours (Total, this make and model), 108 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5NYC01LA198
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Moran
Registration:
N44EU
Model/Series:
Europa Monowheel 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
A044
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/02/2001, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
47 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
912
Registered Owner:
John J. Moran
Rated Power:
95 hp
Operator:
John J. Moran
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OXC
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1155 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.35 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Oxford, CT (OXC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1115 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Waterbury-Oxford Airport (OXC)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
727 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Page 5 of 5NYC01LA198
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
11/14/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven Levine; FAA/FSDO; Windsor Locks, CT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
