Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hudson, NH
Accident Number:
NYC02LA002
Date & Time:
10/02/2001, 1310 EDT 
Registration:
N8393H
Aircraft:
Beech C-45H
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The Twin Beech (C-45H) departed on a local training flight with the pilot/owner in the left seat 
and a flight instructor in the right seat to conduct a flight review.  Shortly after departure, the 
left engine started to shake, then it seized.  While the flight instructor reached for the 
emergency checklist, the pilot/owner inadvertently feathered the good engine.  The flight 
instructor took control of the airplane and performed a forced landing.  The feathering buttons 
were only accessible to the pilot/owner, who had never unfeathered an engine in flight, was not 
familiar with the procedures necessary to restart the engine, and was subsequently unable to 
assist in unfeathering the engine for a restart.  He had 55 hours in make and model, with none 
in the preceding 90 days.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot/owner's failure to properly identify the inoperative engine prior to feathering the 
wrong propeller, and his lack of familiarity with the required corrective procedures.  A factor 
was the initial engine failure. 
Page 2 of 6NYC02LA002
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CLIMB - TO CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) 1 ENGINE - FAILURE,TOTAL
2. (C) WRONG PROPELLER FEATHERED - NOT IDENTIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) LACK OF FAMILIARITY WITH AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Page 3 of 6NYC02LA002
Factual Information
On October 2, 2001, about 1310 eastern daylight time, a Beech C-45H, N8393H, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing in Hudson, New Hampshire.  The certificated 
commercial pilot, flight instructor, and passenger received minor injuries.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the instructional flight.  No flight plan had been filed 
for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The purpose of the flight was to conduct a flight review for the airplane owner, who occupied 
the left seat.  A flight instructor occupied the right seat.  According to a written statement from 
the pilot:
"...the flight was normal up until approximately 2,000 feet on climb out.  At that time, the left 
engine started to shake.  Shortly after, the left engine failed, [and] the left propeller came to a 
complete stop."
"[The flight instructor]...added power to the right engine, and vocalized that he would get the 
engine failure checklist.  At this time, I was manipulating the controls.  While he reached down 
to obtain the checklist located on the floor between us, I depressed the [right] engine feather 
button, [and] the right engine subsequently feathered.  In the confusion, without confirmation 
from [the flight instructor]...I depressed the wrong feather button and feathered the wrong 
engine."
"[The flight instructor]...vocalized and took command of the aircraft.  [The flight 
instructor]...instructed me to start the right engine.  Two attempts at restart were unsuccessful.  
It was necessary for me to conduct the restart procedure due to the fact that the starter controls 
are located on the left side, not accessible to him."
"We were losing altitude rapidly; there were not many suitable landing areas.  [The flight 
instructor]...located a golf driving range approximately 300 yards long.  He successfully made 
an emergency landing into this area."
According to a written statement from the flight instructor:
"We departed Nashua airport and headed southeast, leveling off at pattern altitude approx 3 or 
4 miles away, then started a slow climb, at approx 2,000 feet MSL, the left engine started to 
shake and shortly after the engine failed.  I added power to the right engine and told...[the 
pilot] I would get the engine failure checklist.  [The pilot]...was still flying the airplane.  I 
reached down to get the checklist on the floor between us.  After opening it to the proper 
section, I realized the airspeed was still decreasing.  Then I  found out,[the pilot]...had 
feathered the wrong engine, and didn't tell me.  I told [the pilot]...I was taking command of the 
aircraft.  He was badly shaking when I asked him to restart the right engine.  We were losing 
altitude rapidly and [I] had to focus on flying the airplane.  I found a golf driving range and 
made a successful emergency landing."
In a follow up telephone interview, the pilot was asked why the engine was not restarted.  He 
said the feathering button needed to be held down, but he was not familiar with the engine 
restart procedures and said he had never conducted an inflight restart.  In addition, he said 
that after he had feathered the wrong engine, he "just froze."
In a follow-up telephone interview, the flight instructor reported that during the landing, the 
right engine and firewall separated from the wing.  When asked why the good engine was not 
Page 4 of 6NYC02LA002
unfeathered, and restarted, he replied that the feathering buttons for both propellers were 
located on the top of the left side glare shield in front of the pilot.  Unfeathering the propeller 
required the appropriate feather button to be held in a depressed position until the propeller 
came out of feather and started rotating, and then, the feather button had to be pulled out to 
stop the propeller from going back into feather again.  He reported that after the left engine 
lost power, and the right engine was feathered, he had to devote his full attention to the flying 
the airplane and picking a landing area.
According to the pilots involved, the airplane owner's flight experience was 3,877 hours, with 
872 hours in multi-engine airplanes, and 55 hours in make and model.  The pilot had flown 10 
hours in the preceding 90 days, with none in make and model.  The flight experience of the 
flight instructor was in excess of 20,000 hours, with 16,000 hours in multi-engine airplanes, 
and 500 hour in make and model. He had flown 230 hours in the preceding 90 days, with 30 
hours in make and model.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/17/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/1999
Flight Time:
3877 hours (Total, all aircraft), 55 hours (Total, this make and model), 3000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
53, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/21/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/02/2001
Flight Time:
20000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 500 hours (Total, this make and model), 17000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 230 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 67 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 5 of 6NYC02LA002
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N8393H
Model/Series:
C-45H 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
AF 854
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tailwheel
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/06/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9360 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5420 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
R-985
Registered Owner:
Frank Hammerbacher
Rated Power:
450 hp
Operator:
Frank Hammerbacher
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ASH, 200 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1245 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
330°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5500 ft agl
Visibility
25 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.86 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Nashua, NH (ASH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Hudson, NH (ASH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1305 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Boire Field (ASH)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
200 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6NYC02LA002
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
42.722500, -71.426944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert L Hancock
Adopted Date:
11/28/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
John Keefe; Federal Aviation Administration; Portland, ME
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
