National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BEND, OR
Accident Number: SEA98LA058
Date & Time: 04/01/1998, 1540 PST
Registration: N1069D
Aircraft: Cessna 195A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During the landing roll, when the dual student allowed the tailwheel aircraft to drift too close to the right side of the runway, the instructor applied left rudder and left brake.
As he took this corrective action, the left main gear leg fractured and separated from the aircraft.
NTSB examination of the fracture surface revealed that two fatigue cracks had initiated in corrosion pits created where the gear leg rubbed against the gear leg clamping system.
The two cracks eventually combined to become one, and when loads were applied during the landing roll, an overstress separation stemming from the fatigue fracture region occurred.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Separation by fracture of the left main gear leg, as the result of fatigue cracks that initiated in corrosion pits on the gear leg surface.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - SEPARATION 2.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - FRACTURED 3.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - FATIGUE 4.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - CORRODED 5.
The certified flight instructor and his student, who is a private pilot, were not injured, but the aircraft, which was owned by the student, sustained substantial damage.
The 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight, which had been in the air for about 40 minutes, was being operated in visual meteorological conditions.
No flight plan had been filed, and there was no report of an ELT transmission.
According to the CFI, the student, who had recently purchased the aircraft, allowed the aircraft to drift toward the right edge of the runway during the landing roll.
At the point where it looked like additional corrective action was necessary, the instructor took control and applied left brake and left rudder.
At that point the left main gear leg fractured where it protrudes from the gear leg attach box.
NTSB examination of the fracture surface revealed that two separate fatigue cracks had initiated in an area of corrosion generated by the gear leg rubbing on the gear leg clamping system.
These two cracks had  combined and formed a united crack front.
When loads were applied to the gear leg during the landing roll, an overstress separation stemming from the fatigue fracture region occurred.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
