National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SABETHA, KS
Accident Number: CHI98LA116
Date & Time: 04/03/1998, 1000 CST
Registration: N7108Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-25-235
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot stated that the aircraft lost engine power while maneuvering near the airport and he was unable to restart the engine.
The pilot reported that he landed the airplane in a pasture and the airplane came to rest after a short slide.
The purpose of the accident flight was to calibrate the sprayers on the aircraft.
The accident engine was inspected by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), Wichita, Kansas, and no anomalies were found.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Factual Information On April 3, 1998, at 1000 central standard time, a Piper PA-25-235, N7108Z, was substantially damaged following a total loss of engine power and subsequent forced landing in a farmer's field.
The commercial pilot reported no injuries.
The 14 CFR Part 91 maintenance flight was not operating on a flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The flight departed Sabetha Municipal Airport, Sabetha, Kansas, at 0955.
According to the pilot's written statement, the purpose of the flight was to calibrate the sprayers on the aircraft.
The pilot stated that the aircraft lost engine power while maneuvering near the airport and he was unable to restart the engine.
The pilot stated that he landed the airplane in a pasture and the airplane came to rest after a short slide.
The accident engine was inspected by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), Wichita, Kansas, and no anomalies were found.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 23, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
