National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: COLDFOOT, AK
Accident Number: ANC98LA034
Date & Time: 04/03/1998, 1900 AST
Registration: N1205F
Aircraft: Cessna 185F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The pilot, and two passengers, were taxiing for takeoff in a wheel/ski equipped, tailwheel airplane.
The flight was a VFR air taxi flight from a remote lake.
The landing/departure area was about 3,500 feet long, and covered by soft snow.
As the pilot began to taxi, he noticed the snow was softer than anticipated, so he began several taxi runs to pack down the snow for takeoff.
During a turn, the right ski encountered soft snow and sank.
The right wing struck the snow, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane received damage to the right wing, and propeller.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for takeoff.
Soft, snow covered terrain was a factor in the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 3.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14 CFR Part 135 when the accident occurred.
The airplane was registered to the pilot, and operated by North Quest Aviation, North Pole, Alaska.
The certificated commercial pilot, and the two passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
A VFR flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on April 6, 1998, at 1050, the pilot reported he landed at Squaw Lake about 1830.
The landing/departure area was about 3,500 feet long.
He loaded his passengers and began to taxi for takeoff from a mining camp.
The snow was softer than anticipated, so the pilot began several taxi runs to pack down the snow for takeoff.
During a turn, the right ski encountered soft snow and sank.
The right wing struck the snow, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane received damage to the right wing, and propeller.
Company personnel reported the flight was overdue, and a search was initiated.
Search personnel located the accident site on 4/4/98.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 32, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
