Page 1 of 2ERA18LA140
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Panama City, FL
Accident Number:
ERA18LA140
Date & Time:
05/02/2018, 1000 CDT 
Registration:
N923SM
Aircraft:
ROBINSON R22
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
On May 2, 2018, about 1000 central standard time, a Robinson R-22 Mariner helicopter, 
N923SM, was substantially damaged during a forced landing to water near Panama City, 
Florida. The commercial pilot received minor injuries. The flight was operated in accordance 
with Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a positioning flight. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight that departed Perry-Foley 
Airport (40J), Perry, Florida at 0830, and was destined for Destin Executive Airport (DTS), 
Destin, Florida.
The pilot reported that 90 minutes after departing 40J, while in cruise flight at 80 knots and 
800 ft mean sea level (msl), the helicopter slowly started losing airspeed; he pushed the cyclic 
forward, but the airspeed kept decreasing and the helicopter was beginning to lose altitude. He 
continued to push the cyclic forward until it hit the stop and realized he had no cyclic authority. 
The pilot stated there was no forward airspeed and the helicopter continued to descend until it 
impacted the water. The helicopter floated briefly until it was struck by waves and rolled 
inverted.
A pilot flying in formation with the accident helicopter noticed that the helicopter slowed from 
about 80 knots to 30 knots in about 15 seconds. The pilot further reported that the helicopter 
was descending in a reverse gliding attitude and struck the water with the tail boom first, 
before rolling upside down.
Examination of the helicopter by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the 
main rotor blades were deformed, the fuselage was structurally damaged, and the tail boom 
was partially separated. In addition, a tiedown rope and blade sock used to secure the 
helicopter blades on the ground was found tightly wrapped around the swash plate and pitch 
change links of the main rotor.
The two-seat, semi-rigid single-main-rotor, single-engine helicopter, was manufactured in 1991 
and was issued a standard airworthiness certificate. The helicopter was equipped with floats 
and was powered by a 160-horsepower Lycoming O-320-B2C series engine.
Page 2 of 2ERA18LA140
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
At 0953, the weather recorded at Northwest Florida Beaches International Airport Panama 
City (ECP) Florida, included no clouds or restriction to visibility, wind from 140° at 9 knots, 
and visibility 10 statute miles. The temperature was 20°C, and the dew point was 18°C. The 
altimeter setting was 30.27 inches of mercury.
The wreckage was retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON
Registration:
N923SM
Model/Series:
R22 MARINER
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
N923SM LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KECP, 68 ft msl
Observation Time:
0953 EST
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 18°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
9 knots / , 140°
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
Altimeter Setting:
30.27 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
PERRY, FL (40J)
Destination: 
DESTIN, FL (DTS)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence A Mccarter
Additional Participating Persons:
Kevin Atkins; FAA FSDO; Vestavia Hills, AL
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
